.. _CH2.5:

5. Getting Started
------------------

Without a teacher, you cannot dive right into tuning. You will quickly lose
your bearing and have no idea how to get back. Therefore, you must first
learn/practice certain tuning procedures so that you don't end up with an
unplayable piano that you cannot restore. This section is an attempt to get you
to the level at which you might try a real tuning, without running into those
types of difficulties.

The first things to learn are what not to do, in order to avoid destroying the
piano, which is not difficult. If you tighten a string too much, it will break.
The initial instructions are designed to minimize string breakage from
amateurish moves, so read them carefully. Plan ahead so that you know what to
do in case you break a string. A broken string per se, even when left for long
periods of time, is no disaster to a piano. However, it is probably wise to
conduct your first practices just before you intend to call your tuner. Once
you know how to tune, string breakage is a rare problem except for very old or
abused pianos. The tuning pins are turned by such small amounts during tuning
that the strings almost never break. One common mistake beginners make is to
place the lever on the wrong tuning pin. Since turning the pin does not cause
any audible change, they keep turning it until the string breaks. One way to
avoid this is to always start by tuning flat, as recommended below, and to
never turn the pin without listening to the sound.

The most important consideration for a starting tuner is to preserve the
condition of the pinblock.  The pressure of the pinblock on the pin is
enormous. Now you will never have to do this, but if you were to hypothetically
turn the pin 180ยบ very rapidly, the heat generated at the interface
between pin and pinblock would be sufficient to cook the wood and alter its
molecular structure. Clearly, all rotations of the pin must be conducted in
slow, small, increments. If you need to remove a pin by turning it, rotate only
a quarter turn (counter clock-wise), wait a moment for the heat to dissipate
away from the interface, then repeat the procedure, etc.; without such
precautions, the wood surrounding the pin will turn to charcoal.

I will describe everything assuming a grand piano, but the corresponding motion
for the upright should be obvious. There are two basic motions in tuning. The
first is to turn the pin so as to either pull or release the string. The second
is to rock the pin back towards you (to pull on the string) or rock it
forwards, towards the string, to release it. The rocking motion, if done to
extreme, will enlarge the hole and damage the pinblock. Note that the hole is
somewhat elliptical at the top surface of the pinblock because the string is
pulling the pin in the direction of the major axis of the ellipse. Thus a small
amount of backwards rocking does not enlarge the ellipse because the pin is
always pulled into the front end of the ellipse by the string. Also, the pin is
not straight but bent elastically towards the string by the pull of the string.
Therefore, the rocking motion can be quite effective in moving the string. Even
a small amount of forward rocking, within the elasticity of the wood, is
harmless. It is clear from these considerations that you must use the rotation
whenever possible, and use the rocking motion only when absolutely necessary.
Only very small rocking motions should be used. For the extreme high notes (top
two octaves), the motion needed to tune the string is so small that you may not
be able to control it adequately by rotating the pin. Rocking provides much
finer control, and can be used for that final miniscule motion to bring it into
perfect tune.

Now, what is the easiest way to start practicing? First, let's choose the
easiest notes to tune. These lie in the ``C3-C4`` octave. Lower notes are harder to
tune because of their high harmonic content, and the higher notes are difficult
because the amount of pin rotation needed to tune becomes extremely small. Note
that middle ``C`` is ``C4``; the ``B`` just below it is ``B3`` and the ``D`` immediately above
middle ``C`` is ``D4``. That is, the octave number 1, 2, 3, . . . changes at ``C``, not at
``A``. Let's choose ``G3`` as our practice note and start numbering the strings. Each
note in this region has 3 strings. Starting from the left, let's number the
strings *123* (for ``G3``), *456* (for ``G3#``), *789* (for ``A3``), etc. Place a wedge between
strings *3* and *4* in order to mute string *3* so that when you play ``G3``, only *1* and
*2* can vibrate. Place the wedge about midway between the bridge and agraffe.

There are two basic types of tuning: unison and harmonic. In unison, the two
strings are tuned identically. In harmonic tuning, one string is tuned to a
harmonic of the other, such as thirds, fourths, fifths, and octaves. The three
strings of each note are tuned in unison, which is easier than harmonic tuning,
so let's try that first.

.. _CH2.5.a:

a. Engaging and Manipulating the Tuning Lever
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If your tuning lever has adjustable length, pull it out about 3 inches and lock
it in place. Hold the handle of the tuning lever in your RH and the socket in
your LH and engage the socket over the pin. Orient the handle so that it is
approximately perpendicular to the strings and pointing to your right. Lightly
jiggle the handle around the pin with your RH and engage the socket with your
LH so that the socket is securely engaged, as far down as it will go. From day
one, develop a habit of jiggling the socket so that it is securely engaged. At
this point, the handle is probably not perfectly perpendicular to the strings;
choose the socket position so that the handle is as close to perpendicular as
the socket position will allow. Now find a way to brace your RH so that you can
apply firm pressure on the lever. For example, you can grab the tip of the
handle with the thumb and one or two fingers, and brace the arm on the wooden
piano frame or brace your pinky against the tuning pins directly under the
handle. If the handle is closer to the plate (the metal frame) over the
strings, you might brace your hand against the plate. You should not grab the
handle like you hold a tennis racket and push-pull to turn the pin -- this will
not give enough control. You may be able to do that after years of practice,
but in the beginning, grabbing the handle and pushing without bracing against
something is too difficult to control accurately. So develop a habit of finding
good places to brace your hand against, depending on where the handle is.
Practice these positions making sure that you can exert controlled, constant,
powerful pressure on the handle, but do not turn any pins yet.

The lever handle must point to the right so that when you turn it towards you
(the string goes sharp), you counteract the force of the string and free the
pin from the front side of the hole (towards the string). This allows the pin
to turn more freely because of the reduction in friction. When you tune flat,
both you and the string are trying to turn the pin in the same direction. Then
the pin would turn too easily, except for the fact that both your push and the
string's pull jam the pin against the front of the hole, increasing the
pressure (friction) and preventing the pin from rotating too easily. If you had
placed the handle to the left, you run into trouble for both the sharp and flat
motions. For the sharp motion, both you and the string jam the pin against the
front of the hole, making it doubly difficult to turn the pin, and damaging the
hole. For the flat motion, the lever tends to lift the pin off from the front
edge of the hole and reduces the friction. In addition, both the lever and
string are turning the pin in the same direction. Now the pin now turns too
easily. The lever handle must point to the left for uprights. Looking down on
the tuning pin, the lever should point to 3 o'clock for grands and to 9 o'clock
for uprights. In both cases, the lever is on the side of the last winding of
the string.

Professional tuners do not use these lever positions. Most use 1-2 o'clock for
grands and 10-11 o'clock for uprights and Reblitz recommends 6 o'clock for
grands and 12 o'clock for uprights. In order to understand why, let's first
consider positioning the lever at 12 o'clock on a grand (it is similar at 6
o'clock). Now the friction of the pin with the pinblock is the same for both
the sharp and flat motions. However, in the sharp motion, you are going against
the string tension and in the flat motion, the string is helping you.
Therefore, the difference in force needed between sharp and flat motions is
much larger than the difference when the lever is at 3 o'clock, which is a
disadvantage. However, unlike the 3 o'clock position, the pin does not rock
back and forth during tuning so that when you release the pressure on the
tuning lever, the pin does not spring back -- it is more stable -- and you can
get higher accuracy.

The 1-2 o'clock position is a good compromise that makes use of both of the
advantages of the 3 o'clock and 12 o'clock positions. Beginners do not have the
accuracy to take full advantage of the 1-2 o'clock position, so my suggestion
is to start with the 3 o'clock position, which should be easier at first, and
transition to the 1-2 o'clock position as your accuracy increases. When you
become good, the higher accuracy of the 1-2 o'clock position can speed up your
tuning so that you can tune each string in a few seconds. At the 3 o'clock
position, you will need to guess how much the pin will spring back and
over-tune by that amount, which takes more time. Clearly, exactly where you
place the lever will become more important as you improve.

.. _CH2.5.b:

b. Setting the Pin
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is important to "set the pin" correctly in order for the tuning to hold. If
you look down on the pin, the string comes around the right side of the pin
(grands -- it is on the left for uprights) and twirls around it. Therefore if
you rotate the pin CW (clockwise), you will tune sharp and vice versa. The
string tension is always trying to rotate the pin CCW (counter clock-wise, or
flat). Normally, a piano de-tunes flat as you play it. However, because the
grip of the pinblock on the pin is so strong, the pin is never straight but is
always twisted.

If you rotate it CW and stop, the top of the pin will be twisted CW with
respect to the bottom. In this position, the top of the pin wants to rotate CCW
(the pin wants to untwist) but can't because it is held by the pinblock.
Remember that the string is also trying to rotate it CCW. The two forces
together can be sufficient to quickly de-tune the piano flat when you play
something loud.

If the pin is turned CCW, the opposite happens -- the pin will want to untwist
CW, which opposes the string force. This reduces the net torque on the pin,
making the tuning more stable. In fact, you can twist the pin so far CCW that
the untwisting force is much larger than the string force and the piano can
then de-tune itself sharp as you play. Clearly, you must properly "set the pin"
in order produce a stable tuning. This requirement will be taken into account
in the following tuning instructions.

.. _CH2.5.c:

c. Tuning Unisons
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Now engage the tuning lever on the pin for string *1*. We will tune string *1*
to string *2*. The motion you will practice is: 

#. flat, 
#. sharp, 
#. flat,
#. sharp
#. flat (tune)

Except for #1, each motion must be smaller than
the previous one. As you improve, you will add or eliminate steps as you see
fit. We are assuming that the two strings are almost in tune. As you tune, you
must follow two rules: 

* Never turn the pin unless you are simultaneously listening to the sound.
* Never release the pressure on the tuning lever handle until that motion is
  complete.

For example, let's start with motion #1: keep playing the note every second or
two with the LH so that there is a continuous sound, while pushing the end of
the lever handle away from you with the thumb and 2nd finger. Play the note in
such a way as to maintain a continuous sound. Don't lift the key for any length
of time, as this will stop the sound. Keep the key down and play with a quick
up-and-down motion so that there is no break in the sound. The pinky and the
rest of your RH should be braced against the piano. The required motion of the
lever is a few millimeters. First, you will feel an increasing resistance, and
then the pin will start to rotate. Before the pin begins to rotate, you should
hear a change in the sound. As you turn the pin, listen for string *1* going
flat, creating a beat with the center string; the beat frequency increasing as
you turn. Stop at a beat frequency of 2 to 3 per second. The tip of the tuning
lever should move less than one cm. Remember, never rotate the pin when there
is no sound because you will immediately lose track of where you are with
respect to how the beats are changing. Always maintain constant pressure on the
lever until that motion is completed for the same reason.

What is the rationale behind the above 5 motions? Assuming that the two strings
are in reasonable tune, you first tune string *1* flat in step #1 to make sure
that in step #2 you will pass the tuning point. This also protects against the
possibility that you had placed the lever on the wrong tuning pin; as long as
you are turning flat, you will never break a string.

After #1 you are flat for sure, so in step #2 you can listen to the tuning
point as you pass through it. Go past it until you hear a beat frequency of
about 2 to 3 per second on the sharp side, and stop. Now you know where the
tuning point is, and what it sounds like. The reason for going so far past the
tuning point is that you want to set the pin, as explained above.

Now go back flat again, step #3 but this time, stop just past the tuning point,
as soon as you can hear any incipient beats. The reason why you don't want to
go too far past the tuning point is that you don't want to undo the "setting of
the pin" in step #2. Again, note exactly what the tuning point sounds like. It
should sound perfectly clean and pure. This step assures that you did not set
the pin too far.

Now conduct the final tuning by going sharp (step #4), by as little as you can
beyond perfect tune, and then bringing it into tune by turning flat (step #5).
Note that your final motion must always be flat in order to set the pin. Once
you become good, you might be able to do the whole thing in two motions (sharp,
flat), or three (flat, sharp, flat).

Ideally, from step #1 to final tune, you should maintain the sound with no
stoppage, and you should always be exerting pressure on the handle; never
letting go of the lever. Initially, you will probably have to do this motion by
motion. When you become proficient, the whole operation will take only a few
seconds. But at first, it will take a lot longer. Until you develop your
"tuning muscles" you will tire quickly and may have to stop from time to time
to recover. Not only the hand/arm muscles, but the mental and ear concentration
required to focus on the beats can be quite a strain and can quickly cause
fatigue. You will need to develop "tuning stamina" gradually. Most people do
better by listening through one ear than through both, so turn your head to see
which ear is better.

The most common mistake beginners make at this stage is to try to listen for
beats by pausing the tuning motion. Beats are difficult to hear when nothing is
changing. If the pin is not being turned, it is difficult to decide which of
the many things you are hearing is the beat that you need to concentrate on.
What tuners do is to keep moving the lever and then listening to the changes in
the beats. When the beats are changing, it is easier to identify the particular
beat that you are using for tuning that string. Therefore, slowing down the
tuning motion doesn't make it easier. Thus the beginner is between a rock and a
hard place. Turning the pin too quickly will result in all hell breaking loose
and losing track of where you are. On the other hand, turning too slowly will
make it difficult to identify the beats. Therefore work on determining the
range of motion you need to get the beats and the right speed with which you
can steadily turn the pin to make the beats come and go. In case you get
hopelessly lost, mute strings *2* and *3* by placing a wedge between them, play the
note and see if you can find another note on the piano that comes close. If
that note is lower than ``G3``, then you need to tune it sharp to bring it back,
and vice versa.

Now that you have tuned string *1* to string *2*, reposition the wedge so that
you mute *1*, leaving *2* and *3* free to vibrate. Tune *3* to *2*. When you
are satisfied, remove the wedge and see if the ``G`` is now free of beats. You
have tuned one note! If the ``G`` was in reasonable tune before you started, you
haven't accomplished much, so find a note nearby that is out of tune and see if
you can "clean it up". Notice that in this scheme, you are always tuning one
single string to another single string. In principle, if you are really good,
strings *1* and *2* are in perfect tune after you finish tuning *1*, so you
don't need the wedge any more. You should be able to tune *3* to *1* and *2*
vibrating together. In practice this doesn't work until you become really
proficient. This is because of a phenomenon called sympathetic vibration.

.. _CH2.5.d:

d. Sympathetic Vibrations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The accuracy required to bring two strings into perfect tune is so high that it
is a nearly impossible job. It turns out that, in practice, this is made easier
because when the frequencies approach within a certain interval called the
"sympathetic vibration range", the two strings change their frequencies towards
each other so that they vibrate with the same frequency. This happens because
the two strings are not independent, but are coupled to each other at the
bridge. When coupled, the string vibrating at the higher frequency will drive
the slower string to vibrate at a slightly higher frequency, and vice versa.
The net effect is to drive both frequencies towards the average frequency of
the two. Thus when you tune *1* and *2* unison, you have no idea whether they
are in perfect tune or merely within the sympathetic vibration range (unless
you are an experienced tuner). In the beginning, you will most likely not be in
perfect tune.

Now if you were to try to tune a third string to the two strings in sympathetic
vibration, the third string will bring the string closest to it in frequency
into sympathetic vibration. But the other string may be too far off in
frequency. It will break off the sympathetic vibration, and will sound
dissonant. The result is that no matter where you are, you will always hear
beats -- the tuning point disappears! It might appear that if the third string
were tuned to the average frequency of the two strings in sympathetic
vibration, all three should go into sympathetic vibration. This does not appear
to be the case unless all three frequencies are in perfect tune. If the first
two strings are sufficiently off, a complex transfer of energy takes place
among the three strings. Even when the first two are close, there will be
higher harmonics that will prevent all beats from disappearing when a third
string is introduced. In addition, there are frequent cases in which you cannot
totally eliminate all beats because the two strings are not identical.
Therefore, a beginner will become totally lost, if he were to try to tune a
third string to a pair of strings. Until you become proficient at detecting the
sympathetic vibration range, always tune one string to one; never one to two.
In addition, just because you tuned *1* to *2* and *3* to *2*, it does not mean that
the three strings will sound "clean" together. Always check; if it is not
completely "clean", you will need to find the offending string and try again.

Note the use of the term "clean". With enough practice, you will soon get away
from listening to beats, but instead, you will be looking for a pure sound that
results somewhere within the sympathetic vibration range. This point will
depend on what types of harmonics each string produces. In principle, when
tuning unisons, you are trying to match the fundamentals. In practice, a slight
error in the fundamentals is inaudible compared to the same error in a high
harmonic. Unfortunately, these high harmonics are generally not exact harmonics
but vary from string to string. Thus, when the fundamentals are matched, these
high harmonics create high frequency beats that make the note "muddy" or
"tinny". When the fundamentals are de- tuned ever so slightly so that the
harmonics do not beat, the note "cleans up". Reality is even more complicated
because some strings, especially for the lower quality pianos, will have
extraneous resonances of their own, making it impossible to completely
eliminate certain beats. These beats become very troublesome if you need to use
this note to tune another one.

.. _CH2.5.e:

e. Making that Final Infinitesimal Motion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We now advance to the next level of difficulty. Find a note near ``G5`` that is
slightly out of tune, and repeat the above procedure for ``G3``. The tuning
motions are now much smaller for these higher notes, making them more
difficult. In fact you may not be able to achieve sufficient accuracy by
rotating the pin. We need to learn a new skill. This skill requires you to
pound on the notes, so put on your ear muffs or ear plugs.

Typically, you would get through motion #4 successfully, but for motion #5 the
pin would either not move or jump past the tuning point. In order to make the
string advance in smaller increments, press on the lever at a pressure slightly
below the point at which the pin will jump. Now strike hard on the note while
maintaining the same pressure on the lever. The added string tension from the
hard hammer blow will advance the string by a small amount. Repeat this until
it is in perfect tune. It is important to never release the pressure on the
lever and to keep the pressure constant during these repeated small advances,
or you will quickly lose track of where you are. When it is in perfect tune,
and you release the lever, the pin might spring back, leaving the string
slightly flat. You will have to learn from experience, how much it will spring
back and compensate for it during the tuning process.

The need to pound on the string to advance it is one reason you often hear
tuners pounding on the piano. It is a good idea to get into the habit of
pounding on most of the notes because this stabilizes the tuning. The resulting
sound can be so loud as to damage the ear, and one of the occupational hazards
of tuners is ear damage from pounding. Use of ear plugs is the solution. When
pounding, you will still easily hear the beats even with ear plugs. The most
common initial symptom of ear damage is tinnitus (ringing in the ear). You can
minimize the pounding force by increasing the pressure on the lever. Also, less
pounding is required if the lever is parallel to the string instead of
perpendicular to it, and even less if you point it to the left. This is another
reason why many tuners use their levers more parallel to the strings than
perpendicular. Note that there are two ways to point it parallel: towards the
strings (12 o'clock) and away from the strings (6 o'clock). As you gain
experience, experiment with different lever positions as this will give you
many options for solving various problems. For example, with the most popular
5-degree head on your lever, you may not be able to point the lever handle to
the right for the highest octave because it may hit the wooden piano frame.

.. _CH2.5.f:

f. Equalizing String Tension
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Pounding is also helpful for distributing the string tension more evenly among
all the non-speaking sections of the string, such as the duplex scale section,
but especially in the section between the capo bar and the agraffe. There is
controversy as to whether equalizing the tension will improve the sound. There
is little question that the even tension will make the tuning more stable.
However, whether it makes a material difference in stability may be debatable,
especially if the pins were correctly set during tuning. In many pianos, the
duplex sections are almost completely muted out using felts because they might
cause undesirable oscillations. In fact, the over-strung section is muted out
in almost every piano. Beginners need not worry about the tension in these
"non-speaking" sections of the strings. Thus heavy pounding, though a useful
skill to learn, is not necessary for a beginner.

My personal opinion is that the sound from the duplex scale strings does not
add to the piano sound. In fact, this sound is inaudible and is muted out when
they become audible in the bass. Thus the โart of tuning the duplex scaleโ is a
myth although most piano tuners (including Reblitz!) have been taught to
believe it by the manufacturers, because it makes for a good sales pitch. The
only reason why you want to tune the duplex scale is that the bridge wants to
be at a node of both the speaking and non-speaking lengths; otherwise, tuning
becomes difficult, sustain may be shortened, and you lose uniformity. Using
mechanical engineering terminology, we can say that tuning the duplex scale
optimizes the vibrational impedance of the bridge. In other words, the myth
does not detract from the tunersโ ability to do their job. Nonetheless, a
proper understanding is certainly preferable. The duplex scale is needed to
allow the bridge to move more freely, not for producing sound. Obviously, the
duplex scale will improve the quality of the sound (from the speaking lengths)
because it optimizes the impedance of the bridge, but not because it produces
any sound. The facts that the duplex scale is muted out in the bass and is
totally inaudible in the treble prove that the sound from the duplex scale is
not needed. Even in the inaudible treble, the duplex scale is โtunedโ in the
sense that the aliquot bar is placed at a location such that the length of the
duplex part of the string is a harmonic length of the speaking section of the
string in order to optimize the impedance (โaliquotโ means fractional or
harmonic). If the sound from the duplex scale were audible, the duplex scale
would have to be tuned as carefully as the speaking length. However, for
impedance matching, the tuning need only be approximate, which is what is done
in practice. Some manufacturers have stretched this duplex scale myth to
ridiculous lengths by claiming a second duplex scale on the pin side. Since the
hammer can only transmit tensile strain to this length of string (because of
the rigid Capo bar), this part of the string cannot vibrate to produce sound.
Consequently, practically no manufacturer specifies that the non-speaking
lengths on the pin side be tuned.

.. _CH2.5.g:

g. Rocking It in the Treble
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The most difficult notes to tune are the highest ones. Here you need incredible
accuracy in moving the strings and the beats are difficult to hear. Beginners
can easily lose their bearing and have a hard time finding their way back. One
advantage of the need for such small motions is that now, you can use the
pin-rocking motion to tune. Since the motion is so small, rocking the pin does
not damage the pinblock. To rock the pin, place the lever parallel to the
strings and pointing towards the strings (away from you). To tune sharp, pull
up on the lever, and to tune flat, press down. First, make sure that the tuning
point is close to the center of the rocking motion. If it is not, rotate the
pin so that it is. Since this rotation is much larger than that needed for the
final tuning, it is not difficult, but remember to correctly set the pin. It is
better if the tuning point is front of center (towards the string), but
bringing it too far forward would risk damaging the pinblock when you try to
tune flat. Note that tuning sharp is not as damaging to the pinblock as tuning
flat because the pin is already jammed up against the front of the hole.

.. _CH2.5.h:

h. Rumblings in the Bass
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The lowest bass strings are second in difficulty (to the highest notes) to
tune. These strings produce sound composed mostly of higher harmonics. Near the
tuning point, the beats are so slow and soft that they are difficult to hear.
Sometimes, you can "hear" them better by pressing your knee against the piano
to feel for the vibrations than by trying to hear them with your ears,
especially in the single string section. You can practice unison tuning only
down to the last double string section. See if you can recognize the high
pitched, metallic, ringing beats that are prevalent in this region. Try
eliminating these and see if you need to de-tune slightly in order to eliminate
them. If you can hear these high, ringing, beats, it means that you are well on
your way. Don't worry if you can't even recognize them at first-- beginners are
not expected to.

.. _CH2.5.i:

i. Harmonic Tuning
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Once you are satisfied with your ability to tune unisons, start practicing
tuning octaves. Take any octave near middle ``C`` and mute out the upper two
side strings of each note by inserting a wedge between them. Tune the upper
note to the one an octave below, and vice versa. As with unisons, start near
middle ``C``, then work up to the highest treble, and then practice in the
bass.  Repeat the same practice with 5ths, 4ths, and major 3rds.

After you can tune perfect harmonics, try de-tuning to see if you can hear the
increasing beat frequency as you deviate very slightly from perfect tune. Try
to identify various beat frequencies, especially 1bps (beat per second) and
10bps, using 5ths. These skills will come in handy later.

.. _CH2.5.j:

j. What is Stretch?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Harmonic tuning is always associated with a phenomenon called stretch.
Harmonics in piano strings are never exact because real strings attached to
real ends do not behave like ideal mathematical strings. This property of
inexact harmonics is called inharmonicity. The difference between the actual
and theoretical harmonic frequencies is called stretch. Experimentally, it is
found that most harmonics are sharp compared to their ideal theoretical values,
although there can be a few that are flat.

According to one research result (Young, 1952), stretch is caused by
inharmonicity due to the stiffness of strings. Ideal mathematical strings have
zero stiffness. Stiffness is what is called an extrinsic property -- it depends
on the dimensions of the wire. If this explanation is correct, then stretch
must also be extrinsic. Given the same type of steel, the wire is stiffer if it
is fatter or shorter. One consequence of this dependence on stiffness is an
increase in the frequency with harmonic mode number; i.e., the wire appears
stiffer to harmonics with shorter wavelengths. Stiffer wires vibrate faster
because they have an extra restoring force, in addition to the string tension.
This inharmonicity from stiffness has been calculated to within several percent
accuracy so that the theory appears to be sound, and this single mechanism
appears to account for most of the observed stretch.

These calculations show that stretch is about 1.2 cents for the second mode of
vibration at ``C4`` and doubles about every 8 semitones at higher frequency
(``C4`` = middle ``C``, the first mode is the lowest, or fundamental frequency,
one cent is one hundredth of a semitone, and there are 12 semitones in an
octave). The stretch becomes smaller for lower notes, especially below ``C3``,
because the wire wound strings are quite flexible. Stretch increases rapidly
with mode number and decreases even more rapidly with string length. In
principle, stretch is smaller for larger pianos and larger for lower tension
pianos if the same diameter strings are used. Stretch presents problems in
scale design since abrupt changes in string type, diameter, length, etc., will
produce a discontinuous change in stretch. Very high mode harmonics, if they
happen to be unusually loud, present problems in tuning because of their large
stretch -- tuning out their beats could throw the lower, more important,
harmonics audibly out of tune.

Since larger pianos tend to have smaller stretch, but also tend to sound
better, one might conclude that smaller stretch is better. However, the
difference in stretch is generally small, and the tone quality of a piano is
largely controlled by properties other than stretch.

In harmonic tuning you tune, for example, the fundamental or a harmonic of the
upper note to a higher harmonic of the lower note. The resulting new note is
not an exact multiple of the lower note, but is sharp by the amount of stretch.
What is so interesting about stretch is that a scale with stretch produces
"livelier" music than one without! This has caused some tuners to tune in
double octaves instead of single octaves, which increases the stretch.

The amount of stretch is unique to each piano and, in fact, is unique to each
note of each piano. Modern electronic tuning aids are sufficiently powerful to
record the stretch for all the desired notes of individual pianos. Tuners with
electronic tuning aids can also calculate an average stretch for each piano or
stretch function and tune the piano accordingly. In fact, there are anecdotal
accounts of pianists requesting stretch in excess of the natural stretch of the
piano. In aural tuning, stretch is naturally, and accurately, taken into
account. Therefore, although stretch is an important aspect of tuning, the
tuner does not have to do anything special to include stretch, if all you want
is the natural stretch of the piano.

.. _CH2.5.k:

k. Precision, Precision, Precision
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The name of the game in tuning is precision. All tuning procedures are arranged
in such a way that you tune the first note to the tuning fork, the second to
the first, etc., in sequence. Therefore, any errors will quickly add up. In
fact, an error at one point will often make some succeeding steps impossible.
This happens because you are listening for the smallest hint of beats and if
the beats were not totally eliminated in one note, you can't use it to tune
another as those beats will be clearly heard. In fact, for beginners, this will
happen frequently before you learn how precise you need to be. When this
happens, you will hear beats that you can't eliminate. In that case, go back to
your reference note and see if you hear the same beat; if you do, there is the
source of your problem -- fix it.

The best way to assure precision is by checking the tuning. Errors occur
because every string is different and you are never sure that the beat you hear
is the one you are looking for, especially for the beginner. Another factor is
that you need to count beats per second (bps), and your idea of, say 2bps, will
be different on different days or at different times of the same day until you
have those "beat speeds" well memorized. Because of the critical importance of
precision, it pays to check each tuned note. This is especially true when
"setting the bearings" which is explained below. Unfortunately, it is just as
difficult to check as it is to tune correctly; that is, a person who cannot
tune sufficiently accurately is usually unable to perform a meaningful check.
In addition, if the tuning is sufficiently off, the checking doesn't work.
Therefore, I have provided methods of tuning below that use a minimum of
checks. The resulting tuning will not be very good initially, for Equal
temperament. The Kirnberger temperament (see below) is easier to tune
accurately. On the other hand, beginners can't produce good tunings anyway, no
matter what methods they use. At least, the procedures presented below will
provide a tuning which should not be a disaster and which will improve as your
skills improve. In fact, the procedure described here is probably the fastest
way to learn. After you have improved sufficiently, you can then investigate
the checking procedures, such as those given in Reblitz, or *Tuning* by
Jorgensen.
