.. _CH2.1:

1. Introduction
---------------

This chapter is for those who had never tuned a piano and who would like to see
if they are up to the task. *Piano Servicing, Tuning, and Rebuilding*, by Arthur
Reblitz, will be a helpful reference. The hardest part of learning to tune is
getting started. For those fortunate enough to have someone teach them, that is
obviously the best route. Unfortunately, piano tuning teachers aren't readily
available. Try the suggestions in this chapter and see how far you can get.
After you are familiar with what gives you trouble, you might negotiate with
your tuner for 30 minute lessons for some agreed-upon fee, or ask him to
explain what he is doing as he tunes. Be careful not to impose too much on your
tuner; tuning and teaching can take more than four times longer than simply
tuning it up. Each tuner has her/is own methods of solving problems; these
solutions can’t really be taught because what you do depends on how the piano
“behaves”. Also, be forewarned that piano tuners are not trained teachers and
some may harbor unfounded fears that they might lose a customer. These fears
are unfounded because the actual number of people who succeed in displacing
professional tuners is negligibly small. What you will most likely end up doing
is getting a better understanding of what it takes to tune a piano, develop a
sensitivity to the tuning, and end up hiring tuners more often.

For pianists, familiarity with the art of tuning provides an education that is
directly relevant to their ability to produce music and to maintain their
instruments. It will also enable them to communicate intelligently with their
tuners. For example, the majority of piano teachers to whom I posed the
question did not even know the difference between Equal temperament and
historical temperaments (:ref:`CH2.2`). The main reason why most people try to
learn tuning is out of curiosity -- for the majority, piano tuning is a
baffling mystery. Once people are educated to the advantages of tuned
(maintained) pianos, they are more likely to call their tuners regularly. Piano
tuners can hear certain sounds coming from the piano that most people, even
pianists, don't notice. Those who practice tuning will become sensitized to the
sounds of out-of-tune pianos. It will probably take about one year to start
feeling comfortable with tuning, assuming that you have the time to practice
for several hours at least once every one or two months.

Let me digress here to discuss the importance of understanding the plight of
tuners and proper communications with them, from the point of view of getting
your money's worth from the tuner so that your piano can be properly
maintained. These considerations directly impact your ability to acquire piano
technique as well as your decisions on what or how to perform, given a
particular piano to play. For example, one of the most common difficulties I
have noted with students is their inability to play pianissimo. From my
understanding of piano tuning, there is a very simple answer to this -- most of
these students' pianos are under-maintained. The hammers are too worn/compacted
and the action so out of regulation that playing pianissimo is impossible.
These students will never even be able to practice pianissimo! This applies
also to musical expression and tone control. These under-maintained pianos are
probably one of the causes of the view that piano practice is ear torture, but
it should not be. An out-of-tune piano is one of the major causes of flubs and
bad habits.

Another factor is that you generally have no choice of a piano when asked to
perform. You might encounter anything from a wonderful concert grand, to
spinets, to (horrors!) a cheap baby grand that was totally neglected since it
was purchased 40 years ago. Your understanding of what you can/cannot do with
each of these pianos should be the first input into deciding what and how to
play.

Once you start practicing tuning, you will quickly understand why your spouse
vacuuming the floor, kids running around, the TV or HiFi blaring away, or pots
clanging in the kitchen is not conducive to accurate, quality tuning. Why a
quick, $70 tuning is no bargain compared to a $150 tuning in which the tuner
reshapes and needles the hammers. Yet when you query owners what the tuner did
to their pianos, they generally have no idea. A complaint I frequently hear
from owners is that, after a tuning, the piano sounds dead or terrible. This
often happens when the owner does not have a fixed reference from which to
judge the piano sound -- the judgment is based on whether the owner likes the
sound or not. Such perceptions are too often incorrectly influenced by the
owner's past history. The owner can actually become accustomed to the sound of
a detuned piano with compacted hammers so that when the tuner restores the
sound, the owner doesn't like it because it is now too different from the sound
or feel to which he had become accustomed. The tuner could certainly be at
fault; however, the owner will need to know a minimum of tuning technicalities
in order to make a correct judgment. The benefits of understanding tuning and
properly maintaining the piano are under-appreciated by the general public. The
most important objective of this chapter is to increase that awareness.

Piano tuning does not require good ears, such as absolute pitch, because all
tuning is accomplished by comparison with a reference using beats, starting
with the reference frequency of a tuning fork. In fact an absolute pitch
ability may interfere with the tuning for some people. Therefore, the "only"
hearing skill you will need is the ability to hear and differentiate between
the various beats when two strings are struck. This ability develops with
practice and is not related to knowledge of music theory or to musicality.
Larger grands are easier to tune than uprights; however, most baby grands are
harder to tune than good uprights. Therefore, although you should logically
begin your practice with a lower quality piano (in case you damage it), it will
be more difficult to tune.
