.. _CH2.3:

3. Tuning Tools
---------------

You will need one tuning lever (also called tuning hammer), several rubber
wedges, a felt muting strip, and one or two tuning forks and ear plugs or ear
muffs. Professional tuners nowadays also use electronic tuning aids, but we
will not consider them here because they are not cost effective for the
amateur. We shall learn aural tuning -- tuning by ear. All professional tuners
must be good aural tuners even if they use electronic tuning aids. Grands use
the larger rubber muting wedges and uprights require the smaller ones with wire
handles. Four wedges of each type will suffice. You can buy these by mail order
or you can ask your tuner to buy them for you. The most popular muting strips
are felt, about 4 ft long, 5/8 inch wide. They are used to mute the two side
strings of the 3-string notes in the octave used to "set the bearings" (section
6). They also come as ganged rubber wedges but these don't work as well. The
strips also come in rubber, but rubber does not mute as well and is not as
stable as felt (they can move or pop out while tuning). The disadvantage of the
felt strip is that it will leave a layer of felt fiber on the soundboard after
you are finished, which will need to be vacuumed out.

A high quality tuning lever consists of an extendable handle, a head that
attaches to the tip of the handle, and an interchangeable socket that screws
into the head. It is a good idea to have a piano tuning pin which you can
insert into the socket using a vise grip so that you can screw the socket into
the head firmly. Otherwise, if you grab on the socket with the vise grip, you
can scratch it up. If the socket is not firmly in the head, it will come off
during tuning. Most pianos require a #2 socket, unless your piano has been
re-strung using larger tuning pins. The standard head is a 5 degree head. This
"5 degree" is the angle between the socket axis and the handle. Both the heads
and sockets come in various lengths, but "standard" or "medium" length will do.

Get two tuning forks, ``A-440`` and ``C-523.3`` of good quality. Develop a good
habit of holding them at the narrow neck of the handle so that your fingers do
not interfere with their vibrations. Tap the tip of the fork firmly against a
muscular part of your knee and test the sustain. It should be audible for 10 to
20 seconds when placed close to your ear. The best way to hear the fork is to
place the tip of the handle against the triangular cartilage (ear lobe) that
sticks out towards the middle of the ear hole. You can adjust the loudness of
the fork by pressing the ear lobe in or out using the end of the fork. Do not
use whistles; they are too inaccurate. Ear muffs are necessary protection
devices, since ear damage is a tuner's occupational hazard. It is necessary to
hit the keys hard (pound the keys -- to use a tuners' jargon) in order to tune
properly as explained below, and the sound intensity from such pounding can
damage the ear, resulting in hearing loss and tinnitus.
