.. _CH2.7:

7. Making Minor Reparis (Voicing and Polishing Capstans)
--------------------------------------------------------

Once you start tuning, you cannot help but get involved in small repairs and
conducting some maintenance.

.. _CH2.7.a:

a. Hammer Voicing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A common problem seen with many pianos is compacted hammers. The condition of
the hammer is much more important to the proper development of piano technique
and for cultivating performance skills, than many people realize. Numerous
places in this book refer to the importance of practicing musically in order to
acquire technique. But you can't play musically if the hammer can't do its job,
a critical point that is overlooked even by many tuners (often because they are
afraid that the extra cost will drive customers away). For a grand piano, a
sure sign of compacted hammers is that you find the need to close the lid at
least partially in order to play soft passages. Another sure sign is that you
tend to use the soft pedal to help you play softly. Compacted hammers either
give you a loud sound or none at all. Each note tends to start with an annoying
percussive bang that is too strong, and the sound is overly bright. It is these
percussive bangs that are so damaging to the tuners’/pianist’s ear. A properly
voiced piano enables control over the entire dynamic range and produces a more
pleasing sound.

Let's first see how a compacted hammer can produce such extreme results. How do
small, light hammers produce loud sounds by striking with relatively low force
on strings under such high tension? If you were to try to push down on the
string or try to pluck it, you will need quite a large force just to make a
small sound. The answer lies in an incredible phenomenon that occurs when
tightly stretched strings are struck at right angles to the string. It turns
out that the force produced by the hammer at the instant of impact is
theoretically infinite! This nearly infinite force is what enables the light
hammer to overcome practically any achievable tension on the string and cause
it to vibrate.

Here is the calculation for that force. Imagine that the hammer is at its
highest point after striking the string (grand piano). The string at this point
in time makes a triangle with its original horizontal position (this is just an
idealized approximation, see below). The shortest leg of this triangle is the
length between the agraffe and the impact point of the hammer. The second
shortest leg is from the hammer to the bridge. The longest is the original
horizontal configuration of the string, a straight line from bridge to agraffe.
Now if we drop a vertical line from the hammer strike point down to the
original string position, we get two right triangles back-to-back. These are
two extremely skinny right triangles that have very small angles at the agraffe
and at the bridge; we will call these small angles "theta"s (:math:`\theta`).

The only thing we know at this time is the force of the hammer, but this is not
the force that moves the string, because the hammer must overcome the string
tension before the string will yield. That is, the string cannot move up unless
it can elongate. This can be understood by considering the two right triangles
described above. The string had the length of the long legs of the right
triangles before the hammer struck, but after the strike, the string is the
hypotenuse, which is longer. That is, if the string were absolutely inelastic
and the ends of the string were rigidly fixed, no amount of hammer force will
cause the string to move.

A simple analysis shows that the extra tension force F (in addition to the
original string tension) produced by the hammer strike is given by :math:`f = F
\times \sin \theta`, where f is the force of the hammer. It does not matter
which right triangle we use for this calculation (the one on the bridge side or
on the agraffe side). Therefore, the extra string tension :math:`F =
\frac{f}{\sin \theta}`. At the initial moment of the strike, :math:`\theta =
0`, and therefore :math:`F = \infty`! This happens because :math:`\sin 0 =
0`. Of course, F can get to infinity only if the string cannot stretch and
nothing else can move. What happens in reality is that as F increases towards
infinity, something gives (the string stretches, the bridge moves, etc.) so
that the hammer begins to move the string and :math:`\theta` increases from
zero, making F finite (but still many orders of magnitude larger than your
finger force).

This force multiplication explains why a small child can produce quite a loud
sound on the piano in spite of the hundreds of pounds of tension on the
strings. It also explains why an ordinary person can break a string just
playing the piano, especially if the string is old and has lost its elasticity.
The lack of elasticity causes the F to increase far more than if the string
were more elastic, the string cannot stretch, and :math:`\theta` remains close
to zero.  This situation is greatly exacerbated if the hammer is also compacted
so that there is a large, flat, hard groove that contacts the string. In that
case, the hammer surface has no give and the instantaneous "f" in the above
equation becomes very large. Since all this happens near :math:`\theta = 0` for
a compacted hammer, the force multiplication factor is also increased. The
result is a broken string.

The above calculation is a gross over-simplification and is correct only
qualitatively. In reality, a hammer strike initially throws out a traveling
wave towards the bridge, similarly to what happens when you grab one end of a
rope and flick it. The way to calculate such waveforms is to solve certain
differential equations that are well known. The computer has made the solution
of such differential equations a simple matter and realistic calculations of
these waveforms can now be made routinely. Therefore, although the above
results are not accurate, they give a qualitative understanding of what is
happening, and what the important mechanisms and controlling factors are.

For example, the above calculation shows that it is not the transverse
vibration energy of the string, but the tensile force on the string, that is
responsible for the piano sound. The energy imparted by the hammer is stored in
the entire piano, not just the strings. This is quite analogous to the bow and
arrow -- when the string is pulled, all the energy is stored in the bow, not
the string. And all of this energy is transferred via the tension in the
string. In this example, the mechanical advantage and force multiplication
calculated above (near :math:`\theta = 0`) is easy to see. It is the same
principle on which the harp is based.

The easiest way to understand why compacted hammers produce higher harmonics is
to realize that the impact occurs in a shorter time. When things happen faster,
the string generates higher frequency components in response to the faster
event.

The above paragraphs make it clear that a compacted hammer will produce a large
initial impact on the string whereas a properly voiced hammer will be much
gentler on the string thus imparting more of its energy to the lower
frequencies than the harmonics. Because the same amount of energy is dissipated
in a shorter amount of time for the compacted hammer, the instantaneous sound
level can be much higher than for a properly voiced hammer, especially at the
higher frequencies. Such short sound spikes can damage the ear without causing
any pain. Common symptoms of such damage are tinnitus (ringing in the ear) and
hearing loss at high frequencies. Piano tuners, when they must tune a piano
with such worn hammers, would be wise to wear ear plugs. It is clear that
voicing the hammer is at least as important as tuning the piano, especially
because we are talking about potential ear damage. An out-of-tune piano with
good hammers does not damage the ear. Yet many piano owners will have their
pianos tuned but neglect the voicing.

The two most important procedures in voicing are hammer re-shaping and
needling. When the flattened strike point on the hammer exceeds about 1 cm, it
is time to re-shape the hammer. Note that you have to distinguish between the
string groove length and flattened area; even in hammers with good voicing, the
grooves may be over 5 mm long. In the final analysis you will have to judge on
the basis of the sound. Shaping is accomplished by shaving the "shoulders" of
the hammer so that it regains its previous rounded shape at the strike point.
It is usually performed using 1 inch wide strips of sandpaper attached to
strips of wood or metal with glue or double sided tape. You might start with 80
grit garnet paper and finish it off with 150 grit garnet paper. The sanding
motion must be in the plane of the hammer; never sand across the plane. There
is almost never a need to sand off the strike point. Therefore, leave about 2
mm of the center of the strike point untouched.

Needling is not easy because the proper needling location and needling depth
depend on the particular hammer (manufacturer) and how it was originally
voiced. Especially in the treble, hammers are often voiced at the factory using
hardeners such as lacquer, etc. Needling mistakes are generally irreversible.
Deep needling is usually required on the shoulders just off the strike point.
Very careful and shallow needling of the strike point area may be needed. The
tone of the piano is extremely sensitive to shallow needling at the strike
point, so that you must know exactly what you are doing. When properly needled,
the hammer should allow you to control very soft sounds as well as produce loud
sounds without harshness. You get the feeling of complete tonal control. You
can now open your grand piano fully and play very softly without the soft
pedal! You can also produce those loud, rich, authoritative tones.

.. _CH2.7.b:

b. Polishing the Capstans
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Polishing the capstans can be a rewarding maintenance procedure. They may need
polishing if they have not been cleaned in over 10 years, sometimes sooner.
Press down on the keys slowly to see if you can feel a friction in the action.
A frictionless action will feel like sliding an oily finger along a smooth
glassware. When friction is present, it feels like the motion of a clean finger
on squeaky clean glass. In order to be able to get to the capstans, you will
need to lift the action off from the keys by unscrewing the screws that hold
the action down for the grand. For uprights you generally need to unscrew the
knobs that hold the action in place; make sure that the pedal rods, etc., are
disengaged.

When the action is removed, the keys can be lifted out after removing the key
stop rail. First make sure that all the keys are numbered so that you can
replace them in the correct order. This is a good time to remove all the keys
and clean any previously inaccessible areas as well as the sides of the keys.
You can use a mild cleaning agent such as a cloth dampened with Windex for
cleaning the sides of the keys.

See if the top, spherical contact areas of the capstans are tarnished. If they
do not have a shiny polish, they are tarnished. Use any good
brass/bronze/copper polish (such as Noxon) to polish and buff up the contact
areas. Reassemble, and the action should now be much smoother.
