.. _III.11:

11. Sight Reading
-----------------

“Sight Reading” has been used loosely by many beginner students to mean playing
compositions that have not been memorized, by looking at the score. These
compositions may have been played before and the melodies may already be
familiar. The correct definition is reading unfamiliar music that had not been
practiced before, and it is the topic of this section. It means playing
unfamiliar music at the correct speed and is a skill that is distinct from the
mere ability to figure out the notes in order to learn a new composition.
Beginning students should be taught reading first, then memorizing, and then
sight reading. At advanced levels, sight reading involves the application of
basic music theory, such as chord progressions and harmonies, and
interpretation of the music. Here are the basic rules for sight reading (also,
see Richman):

#. Keep the eyes on the music; do not look at the keyboard/fingers. Glance at
   the hands occasionally when it is necessary for large jumps. Try to develop 
   a peripheral vision towards the keyboard so that you have some idea of where
   the hands are while still looking at the score. With peripheral vision, you 
   can keep track of both hands simultaneously. Develop a habit of feeling the
   keys before playing them. Although this rule applies whether you are sight 
   reading or not, it becomes critical in sight reading. It also helps to "get
   there ahead of time" for jumps, see :ref:`III.7.e` and :ref:`III.7.f` above;
   therefore, you should practice the jump maneuvers in conjunction with the 
   sight reading practice.
#. Play through mistakes and make them as inaudible as possible. The best way
   to do this is to make it sound as if you had modified the music -- then the
   audience does not know whether you made a mistake or changed it. This is why
   students with basic music theory training have such an advantage in sight
   reading. Three ways to make mistakes less audible are to keep the rhythm
   intact, maintain a continuous melody (if you can't read everything, carry
   the melody and omit the accompaniment), and to practice simplifying those
   parts that are too complicated to sight read. The first thing that must be 
   done is to eliminate the habits of stopping and backtracking (stuttering), 
   at every mistake. The best time to develop the skill of not stopping at 
   every mistake is when you begin your first piano lessons. Once the 
   stuttering habit is ingrained, it will take a lot of work to eliminate it. 
   For those with a stuttering habit, the best thing to do is to decide that 
   you will never backtrack again (whether you succeed or not) -- it will 
   slowly go away. Learning to anticipate flubs is a great help, and this will 
   be discussed below. The most powerful tool is the ability to simplify the 
   music. Eliminate ornamentals, fish out the melody from fast runs, etc.
#. Learn all the common musical constructs: Alberti accompaniments, major and
   minor scales and their fingerings as well as their corresponding arpeggios,
   common chords and chord transitions, common trills, ornaments, etc. When 
   sight reading, you should recognize the constructs and not read the 
   individual notes. Memorize the locations of those very high and very low 
   notes as they appear on the score so that you can find them instantly. Start
   by memorizing all the octave ``C``'s, then fill in the others, beginning 
   with notes closest to the ``C``'s.
#. Look ahead of where you are playing; at least one bar ahead, but even more,
   as you develop the skill at reading the music structure. Get to the point 
   where you can read one structure ahead. By looking ahead, you can not only 
   prepare ahead of time but also anticipate flubs before they occur. You can 
   also anticipate fingering problems and can avoid painting yourself into 
   impossible situations. Although fingering suggestions on the music are 
   generally helpful, they are often useless because, although they may be the 
   best fingerings, you may not be able to use them without some practice. 
   Therefore, you should develop your own set of fingerings for sight reading.
#. "Practice, practice, practice". Although sight reading is relatively easy to
   learn, it must be practiced every day in order to improve. It will take most
   students from one to two years of diligent practice to become good. Because
   sight reading depends so heavily on recognition of structures, it is closely
   related to memory. This means that you can lose the sight reading ability if
   you stop practicing. However, just as with memory, if you become a good sight
   reader when young, this ability will stay with you all your life. After
   practicing sight reading, try to play in your mind (:ref:`III.6.j`), some of
   the common structures that you encountered.

Keep adding to the "tricks of the trade" as you improve. Practice the art of
scanning through a composition before sight reading it, in order to get some
feel for how difficult it is. Then you can figure out ahead of time how to get
around the "impossible" sections. You can even practice it quickly, using a
condensed version of the learning tricks (HS, shorten difficult segments, use
parallel sets, etc.), just enough to make it sound passable. I have met sight
readers who would talk to me about some sections of a new piece for a while,
then play through an entire piece with no trouble. I later realized that they
were practicing those sections in the few seconds they had while they were
distracting me with their "discussions".

Gather several books with easy pieces. Because it is initially easier to
practice "sight reading" with familiar pieces, you can use the same
compositions to practice sight reading several times, a week or more apart.
"Sonatina" books, Mozart's easier sonatas, and books of easy popular songs, are
good books for practicing. For the easiest pieces, you might use Beyer, the
beginner books listed in :ref:`III.18.c`, or the easiest Bach pieces for
beginners.  Although you can develop a lot of sight reading skills with
familiar pieces, you should also practice with pieces that you had never seen
before in order to develop true sight reading skills. The most useful skill for
help with true sight reading is sight singing, which we now discuss.
