.. _III.10:

10. Cold Hands, Slippery Fingers, Illness, Hand Injury, Ear Damage
------------------------------------------------------------------

**Cold Hands**: Cold, stiff, hands, on a cold day, is a common affliction
caused mainly by the body's natural reaction to cold. A few people suffer from
pathological problems that may need medical attention. But the majority of
cases are natural body reactions to hypothermia. In that case, the body
withdraws blood, mostly from the extremities, towards the center of the body in
order to conserve heat. The fingers are most susceptible to this cooling,
followed by the hands and feet.

For such cases, the solution is, in principle, simple. You need to raise the
body temperature. In practice, it is often not that easy. In a cold room, even
raising the body temperature so high (with extra clothing) that you feel too
warm does not always eliminate the problem. Clearly, any method of conserving
heat should help. Of course, it is best if you can raise the room temperature.
If not, common aids are: 

#. Soaking the hands/arms in warm water 
#. Use of a room heater, such as a portable radiant heater (about 1KW) that you
   can aim directly at the body, 
#. Thick socks, sweaters, or thermal underwear
#. Gloves without fingers (so you can play the piano with the gloves on)

If you just want to keep the hands warm before playing, mittens are better than
gloves. Hair dryers do not have sufficient power, are not designed to be used
for more than about 10 minutes without overheating dangerously, and are too
noisy for creating warm air around a pianist.

It is not clear whether it is better to stay warm all the time or only when
practicing piano. If you keep warm all the time (such as by wearing thermal
clothing), the body may not detect hypothermia and therefore will maintain the
desired blood flow. On the other hand, the body may become more sensitive to
cold and eventually develop cold hands even when the body is warm, if the room
is cold. For example, if you wear the gloves without fingers all the time, the
hands may become accustomed to this warmth and feel very cold when you take
them off. And the warming effect of these gloves may wear off once the hands
get accustomed to them. Therefore, it is best to wear them only when practicing
or just before practicing. The counter argument is that wearing them all the
time will allow you to play piano at any time, without warm-ups or having to
soak the hands in warm water. Clearly, this is a complex problem and wearing
gloves does not always solve the problem and can make it worse.

The playing muscles are in the arms, so if you want to warm up the piano
muscles, it is more important to warm the forearms/elbows than the fingers. In
fact, every muscle from the forearms all the way to the center of the body is
involved in piano play. Therefore, if you are using warm water to heat the
hands before a performance, try to soak the forearms, especially the upper half
(near the elbows) where the flexor and extensor muscles are concentrated. If
this is not possible, then you have to soak the hands long enough so that the
warm blood can flow from the hands into the arms. The interossei and lumbricals
are in the hand, so these need to be warmed also.

Cold fingers of this type are clearly the body's reaction to cool temperature.
The best solution might be to soak the hands several times a day in very cold
water to acclimate them to cold temperatures. Then they may not react to cold
at all. This might provide a permanent solution. For example, you might cool
them this way right after practice so that it does not interfere with the
practice. The objective of the cooling is to get the skin acclimated to cold
temperatures. Dip in cold water for no more than 5 to 10 seconds; do not cool
the entire hand down to the bone. In fact what you might do is to first warm
the hands in warm water, and then cool only the skin in ice cold water. Such a
treatment should feel good, without any cold shock or pain. This is exactly the
principle behind the Nordic practice of jumping into an opening in a frozen
lake after a hot sauna. This seemingly masochistic practice is actually
completely painless and has beneficial consequences, such as acclimating the
skin to cold temperatures and stopping perspiration that would otherwise cause
the clothes to become soggy and freeze up in the extreme cold. In fact, without
jumping into cold water, a person with clothes wet from perspiration after a
sauna could freeze to death! The pores in the skin can be closed by dipping the
hands into cold water after warming, thus preventing perspiration and retaining
heat in the hands.

**Slippery (Dry/Sweaty) Fingers**: When the fingers are overly dry or wet, they
may become slippery. Too much washing using strong detergents can cause the
hands to become dry. Application of most quality moisturizing lotions such as
Eucerin will solve this problem. In order to avoid smearing the piano keys with
excess lotion, apply in small amounts and wait until the lotion is completely
absorbed into the skin before applying more. Several small applications will
last longer than a single large amount. Wipe off any excess before playing the
piano. People who tend to perspire while playing must also be careful about
slippery fingers. If you initially apply a lotion because the hands were dry,
but you begin to perspire while playing, you can get into terrible problems
with slipperiness if the fingers have excess lotion. Therefore, if you tend to
perspire, be careful about using any kind of lotion. Even without any lotion,
wet or dry fingers can be slippery. In that case, practice using thrust and
pull motions so that you can control the finger positions more accurately.
These motions require some slippage of the fingers over the keys and are
therefore more compatible with slippery fingers.

**Illness**: Some people might think that a harmless illness, such as a cold,
might still allow them to practice piano. After all, there is nothing to do
while resting with a cold and piano is not considered strenuous work. That is a
bad idea. It is particularly important for parents to understand that playing
the piano involves significant exertion, especially of the brain, and not treat
piano as a relaxing pastime when illness strikes. Thus youngsters with even
mild colds should not be made to practice piano, unless the child is willing to
do so on her/is own. There is much more brain activity during piano play than
most people realize. Infections do not affect the whole body equally; they
usually settle opportunistically in stressed organs. If the person is running a
fever and then plays the piano, there will be some risk of brain damage.
Fortunately, most people lose the urge to practice the piano even when only
mildly sick, and this is a clear signal that you should not practice.

Whether one can play piano when sick is an individual matter. To play or not is
quite clear to the pianist; most people will feel the stress of piano playing
even before the symptoms of the illness become clear. Thus it is probably safe
to leave the decision to practice or not, to the pianist. It is useful to know
that, if you feel sudden fatigue or other symptoms that make it difficult to
play, it might be an indication that you are coming down with some illness. The
problem with not playing during an illness is that if the illness lasts for
more than a week, then the hands will lose a considerable amount of
conditioning. Exercises that do not strain the brain, such as scales,
arpeggios, and Hanon, might be appropriate in such a situation.

**Healthy/Unhealthy Practice**: Learning the health consequences of piano
practice is important because any activity can be conducted in a healthy or
unhealthy way. Stress-free, psychologically sound approach to piano practice
can enhance a person’s health whereas practicing without concern for well-being
can be unhealthy. It is important to learn proper breathing so as to avoid
hypoxia. Frustrations resulting from an inability to memorize or acquire
certain skills must be prevented by learning efficient practice methods. This
book discusses methods for avoiding fatigue. Hand injuries are avoidable.
Excessive nervousness is bad for health, not only the performance. We must
think through, or learn from experience, the correct relationships among
students, teachers, parents and the audience. Therefore, by paying attention to
health concerns, piano practice can be made into a beneficial activity as
effective as proper diet and exercise.

**Hand Injuries (Carpal Tunnel, etc.)**: Hand injury is generally not a major
issue for students up to about the intermediate level. For advanced pianists,
it is a major issue because the human hand was not made to withstand such
extreme use. Injury problems with professional pianists are similar to those of
professionals in sports, such as tennis, golf, or football. Therefore, the
limitations from possible injury may be the second most important limitation
after availability of time to practice. It might appear that, because
relaxation is an essential component of piano technique, injury should not
occur. Unfortunately, the physical requirements of playing at advanced levels
are such that (as in sports) injury is likely to occur in spite of well known
precautions and other measures that professionals take. Injury tends to occur
while practicing to acquire difficult technique. Students who use the methods
of this book must be particularly aware of the possibility of injury because
they will quickly start practicing material that require high technical skills.
Thus is it important to know the common types of injuries and how to avoid
them.

Every injury has a cause. Although there are numerous documented accounts of
injury and success/failure of cures, definitive information on causes and cures
has been elusive. The only general cures mentioned are rest and a gradual
return to playing using stress-free methods. I injured the flexor tendons in my
left palm by using golf clubs with worn, hard grips although I always wore golf
gloves. My hand doctor immediately diagnosed the cause of my pain (a notch in
my tendon), but could not tell me how I injured my hand, so he could not really
tell me how to cure it. I figured out later that the pressure of the golf grip
had created notches in my tendons, and these notches moved up and down in my
hand during piano playing; the resulting friction caused inflammation and pain
after long piano practice sessions. The doctor showed me how to feel these
notches by pressing on the tendon and moving my finger. Now I replace the grips
on my clubs frequently and have added pads in my golf glove (cut out from Dr.
Scholl's self-stick foot-pads), and my pain problem has been eliminated.
However, years of gripping the club too hard (I knew nothing about relaxation
in those days) has done permanent damage to my hands so that my fingers are not
as independent as I would like them to be.

You can accidentally sprain certain muscles or tendons, especially in the
shoulders and back. These are generally caused by poor alignment of the hands
or body, and non-balanced playing. The best approach here is caution --
pianists must be extra cautious and avoid such injuries because they can take
years to heal. Stop practicing if you feel any pain. A few days of rest will
not harm your technique and may prevent serious injury. Of course, it is best
to see a doctor; however, most hand doctors are not familiar with piano
injuries.

Fingertips can be injured by playing too hard (loud). This condition can be
temporarily alleviated by proper bandaging. The curled finger position can
cause bruising of the fingertips because there is minimum padding between the
bone and skin at the tip. In the curled position, you can also peel the flesh
off from under the fingernail if the fingernail is cut too short. Avoid both of
these types of injury by using the flat finger position (:ref:`III.4.b`).

Most hand injury is of the repetitive stress injury (RSI) type. Carpal Tunnel
Syndrome (CTS) and tendonitis are common ailments. Anecdotal accounts suggest
that surgery usually does not solve the CTS problem and can do more harm than
good. In addition, surgery is irreversible. Fortunately, massage therapists
have recently solved the problem of curing CTS. Why massage therapists? Because
both pianists and massage therapists use the fingers as their main tools of
their professions. Therefore, they both suffer from the same injuries. However,
massage therapists are in a better position to experiment and find cures while
pianists are not medically trained and have no idea how to even diagnose their
ailments. It turns out, fortunately, that pain is felt long before irreversible
damage occurs so that the syndrome can be cured if treated as soon as you feel
pain. Although pain is usually felt near the wrists, the cause of the pain is
not at the wrists but mainly in the arms and neck where large muscles and
tendons can exert harmful forces on the tendons running through the transverse
ring of tendons at the wrist that bundle all the tendons running to the
fingers. This is why treating the wrist may not cure the pain and wrist surgery
can aggravate the problem. The group with the most advanced methods for CTS is
the SET (Structural Energetic Therapy) massage specialists; they start with
cranial and then progress to deep tissue treatments of the relevant areas of
the head, arms, and body. Cranial is necessary because it gives the quickest
relief and the tissue work alone does not cure the problem. Until you receive
treatment, it is hard to believe that the bones of the skull are related to
CTS. See the SET site for more details. Although this site is for massage
therapists, you can learn what is involved in treating CTS, to what extent it
is curable, and how to find the appropriate therapist. There are still few
therapists trained in this art, but at the very least, you can contact the
experts and discuss your problem. There is a simple test for advanced cases of
CTS. Stand in front of a mirror and dangle the arms straight down, completely
relaxed, and in their “normal” positions. If the thumbs are closest to the
mirror, you are OK. If more knuckles are visible (arms turned inwards), you
have more advanced cases of CTS. Also, the body stance should be straight.
Practically no one has a perfectly straight stance, and it may also be
necessary to straighten any inappropriate stance in order to treat the CTS
completely. The asymmetric playing motions of athletes such as golfers and
tennis players create asymmetric changes in bone density, bone structure and
musculature. Right handed golfers will have higher bone densities in their
right hips; it may be beneficial for RH golfers to practice hitting lefty to
reduce asymmetry injuries/problems.

Stress reduction methods of piano practice, such as Taubman, Alexander, and
Feldenkrais, can be effective both for preventing injury, and for recovering
from injury. In general, it is best to keep the playing finger (except the
thumb) in line with the forearm as much as possible in order to avoid RSI. Of
course, the best preventive measure is not to over-practice with stress. The HS
method is especially beneficial because stress is minimized and each hand gets
to rest before damage can occur. The "no pain, no gain" approach is extremely
harmful. Piano playing can require tremendous exertion and energy, but it must
never be painful. See the Reference section for some informative web sites on
hand injury for pianists.

**Ear Damage (Tinnitus, etc.)**: Ear damage generally occurs as a function of
age; hearing loss can start as early as age 40 and by age 70, most people have
lost some hearing. Hearing loss can occur from over-exposure to loud sounds and
can also be caused by infections and other pathological causes. The person may
lose hearing in the low frequency or high frequency range. This is often
accompanied by tinnitus (ringing sound in the ear). Those who lose hearing in
the low frequency range tend to hear a low, roaring or throbbing tinnitus, and
those who lose hearing in the high frequency range tend to hear a high pitched
whine. Tinnitus may be caused by uncontrollable firing of the hearing nerves in
the damaged section of the ear; however, there are many other causes. See the
Reference section for information on the internet on hearing damage.

Although severe hearing loss is easily diagnosed by an audiologist, its cause
and damage prevention are not well understood. A damaged ear is more easily
damaged than a healthy ear. For example, those with mild hearing loss have
difficulty hearing conversations, but are extremely sensitive to loud sounds --
even moderately loud sounds that do not bother normal people can be painfully
loud because even moderately loud sounds can cause further damage and damage
generally causes pain. Ironically, those with hearing loss can be more
sensitive to loud sounds; that is why hearing aid technology is so difficult –
you can’t simply amplify all sounds. Soft sounds must be amplified but loud
sounds must be attenuated. There is no method for diagnosing tinnitus except
from the comments of the patient. For tests and treatments you need to see an
ENT specialist (Ear Nose Throat). For non-pathological cases, damage is
generally caused by exposure to loud sounds. Yet a few people exposed to very
loud sounds, such as pianists who play every day for hours on concert grands,
piano tuners who routinely use "pounding" during tuning, or members of rock
bands, may not suffer hearing loss. On the other hand, some, who are exposed to
less sound, can lose their hearing, especially with age. Therefore, there is a
wide difference in susceptibility to hearing loss. However, there certainly is
a tendency for those exposed to louder sounds to suffer more hearing loss. It
is likely that hearing loss by pianists and piano tuners (as well as rock band
members, etc., and people who routinely listen to very loud music) is much more
widespread than is generally known because most of them go unreported.

Tinnitus is present in essentially 100% of people 100% of the time, but is so
soft in normal people that it cannot be heard unless the person is in a
soundproofed room. It may be caused by spontaneous firing of the hearing nerves
in the absence of sufficient stimulus. That is, the human hearing mechanism
effectively "turns up the amplification" when there is no sound. Totally
damaged regions produce no sound because the damage is so severe that they
cannot function. Partially damaged regions apparently produce tinnitus because
they are sufficiently damaged to detect almost no ambient sound; this silence
causes the brain to fire the detectors, or the system develops a leak in the
sound signal circuit. These detectors are either piezo-electric material at the
base of hairs inside the cochlea, or ion channels opened and closed by
molecules associated with the hairs -- there is conflicting literature on this
topic. Of course, there are many other causes of tinnitus, and some may even
originate in the brain. Tinnitus is almost always an indication of the onset of
hearing loss.

For those who do not have audible tinnitus, there is probably no need to avoid
loud music, within reasonable limits. Thus practicing the piano at any loudness
should be harmless up to about age 25. Those who already have tinnitus should
avoid exposure to loud piano. However, tinnitus usually "sneaks up" on you, so
that the onset of tinnitus often goes unnoticed until it is too late.
Therefore, everybody should receive tinnitus education and wear ear protection
after age 40 during piano practice. Ear protection is an abhorrent idea to most
pianists but when you consider the consequences (see below), it is definitely
worthwhile. Before wearing protection, do everything possible to reduce sound
intensity, such as soundproofing the room (adding carpets to hard floors,
etc.), voicing the hammers, and generally practicing softly (even loud passages
-- which is a good idea even without possibility of ear damage).

Ear protectors are readily available from hardware stores because many workers
using construction or yard equipment need such protection. For pianists, an
inexpensive unit will suffice because you need to hear some music. You can also
use most of the larger headphones associated with audio systems. Commercial
protectors completely surround the ear and provide a better sound barrier.
Since protectors available today are not designed for pianists, they don’t have
a flat frequency response; that is, the sound of the piano is altered. However,
the human ear is very good at adapting to different types of sound and you can
get used to the new sound very quickly. The piano sound will also be quite
different when you take the protection off (as you will need to do once in a
while to see what the REAL sound is like). These different sounds can be quite
educational for teaching us how much the brain influences what sounds you hear
or don’t hear and how different persons will interpret the same sounds. It is
worthwhile to try ear protection just to experience these different sounds. For
example, you will realize that the piano makes many strange sounds you never
noticed before! The differences in sound are so startling and complex that they
cannot be expressed in words. For lower quality pianos, ear protection will
result in sound simulating a higher quality instrument because the undesirable
high harmonics and extraneous sounds are filtered out.

The brain automatically processes any incoming data, whether you want it to or
not. This is, of course, part of what music is -- it is the brain’s
interpretation of incoming sounds, and most of our reaction to music is
automatic. Thus when you wear ear protection, much of this stimulus disappears,
and a large amount of the brain’s processing power is freed to do other jobs.
In particular, you now have more resources to apply to your HS practice. After
all, that is why you practice HS, and not HT -- so that you can concentrate
more on the difficult task of acquiring technique. Thus you may find that
progress is faster HS when wearing ear protection! This is the same principle
behind why many pianists close their eyes when they want to play something with
high emotional content -- they need all the resources available to produce the
high level of emotion. With eyes closed, you eliminate a tremendous amount of
information coming into the brain because vision is a two-dimensional, multi-
color, moving source of high bandwidth information that must be immediately and
automatically interpreted in many complex ways. Therefore, although most
audiences admire that a pianist can play with the eyes closed, it is actually
easier. Thus, in the near future, most piano students will probably wear ear
protection, just as many athletes and construction workers use helmets today.
It doesn’t make any sense for us to spend the last 10, 30, or more years of our
lives without hearing – a most important lesson Beethoven taught us.

How does piano sound damage the ear? Clearly, loud sound containing many notes
should be most damaging. Thus it is probably not an accident that Beethoven
became prematurely deaf. This also cautions us to practice his music with ear
damage in mind. The specific type of piano is also important. Most uprights
that do not produce sufficient sound are probably least damaging. Large grands
that transfer energy efficiently into the strings with long sustain probably do
not cause as much damage as medium quality pianos in which a large amount of
energy is imparted into the initial, instantaneous bang associated with the
hammer striking the strings. Although much of this damaging sound energy may
not be in the audible range of the ear, we can detect it as an unpleasant or
harsh sound. Thus the medium size grands (about 6 ft) may be most damaging. In
this regard, the condition of the hammer is important, since a worn hammer can
produce a much louder initial bang than a properly voiced hammer. This is why
worn hammers cause more string breakage than new or well voiced hammers. With
old, hardened hammers, probably most pianos can cause ear damage. Thus proper
voicing of the hammer may be much more important than many people realize, for
pianissimo, playing musically, technical development, and protecting the ear.
If you have to close the lid of a grand in order to play softly, or to reduce
the sound to a pleasant level, the hammers probably need voicing.

Some of the loudest sounds are produced by those ear phones used to listen to
music. Parents should warn their youngsters not to keep turning up the volume,
especially if they subscribe to the culture that plays loud music. Some
youngsters will fall asleep with their ear phones blasting; this can be very
damaging because the damage is cumulative. It is a bad idea to give gadgets
with ear phones to youngsters -- postpone it as long as possible. However,
sooner or later, they will end up with one; in that case, warn them before they
suffer ear damage.

Except for some special cases of tinnitus (especially those cases in which you
can alter the sound by moving your jaws, etc.), there is no cure yet. Large
doses of aspirin can cause tinnitus; in that case, stopping its use can
sometimes reverse the process. Small amounts of aspirin taken for cardiac
purposes (81mg) apparently do not cause tinnitus, and there are some claims in
the literature that these small amounts may delay the onset of tinnitus. Loud
tinnitus can be extremely debilitating because it cannot be changed and is
present all the time, and it only increases with time. Many sufferers have been
driven to thoughts of suicide. Although there is no cure, there are remedies,
and all indications are that eventually, we should be able to find a cure.
There are hearing aids that reduce our perception of tinnitus, for example, by
supplying sufficient sound so that the tinnitus is masked or the person is
distracted from the tinnitus. Thus for tinnitus suffers, absolute quietness can
cause the tinnitus to become annoying.

One of the most annoying traits of hearing loss is not that the ear has lost
its sensitivity (frequently, sensitivity tests reveal very little
deterioration), but the inability of the person to properly process the sound
so as to understand speech. People with normal hearing can understand speech
mixed with a large amount of extraneous sound. Understanding speech is usually
the first ability that is lost with onset of hearing loss. Modern hearing aids
can be quite helpful, both by amplifying only those frequencies needed to
understand speech and for suppressing sounds that are loud enough to cause
damage. In other words, if your hearing aid just amplifies all sounds, it may
cause even more damage. Another approach to tinnitus is to train the brain to
ignore the tinnitus. The brain is amazingly trainable, and part of the reason
why tinnitus causes suffering is the inappropriate brain response of the
person. The brain has the ability to either concentrate on the sound, thereby
driving you crazy, or to ignore it, in which case you won’t hear it unless you
are reminded of it. The best example of this effect is the metronome. Most
pianists do not know that if they practice with the metronome too long, the
brain will play tricks so that you either do not hear the click at all, or hear
it at the wrong time, especially if the metronome click is sharp and loud. This
is one reason why modern metronomes have flashing lights. In addition to
enabling you to time yourself without the sound, it allows you to check to see
if what you hear matches the light flashes. Thus modern treatments of tinnitus
start with teaching the patient that others have succeeded in living with it
with minimal discomfort. Then the patient receives ear training in such a way
as to be able to ignore the tinnitus. Fortunately, the brain is quite adept at
learning to ignore a constant sound that is always there.

If you read enough stories about tinnitus suffers, you will probably follow the
advice to wear ear protection after age 40, at least when practicing loud
passages for long periods of time. At the first hint of tinnitus, it is
imperative that you start ear protection procedures because once the tinnitus
starts, ear deterioration can proceed rapidly with exposure to loud sounds,
with significant deterioration every year. Use of a digital piano and turning
the volume down is one solution. Look for an ENT specialist immediately,
especially one experienced in tinnitus treatments. Ear protection applies to
other members of the household; therefore, if at all possible, isolate the
piano room acoustically from the rest of the house. Most quality (glass) doors
will be sufficient. There are a few herbs and “natural” medications that claim
effectiveness against tinnitus. Most of these do not work, and the ones that
seem to benefit some people have dangerous side effects. Although it is true
that there are precious few specialists treating tinnitus, the situation is
improving and there are many sites on the internet with information on
tinnitus, such as The American Tinnitus Association.
