.. _III.19:

19. The “Ideal” Practice Routine (Bach’s Teachings and Invention #4)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Is there an ideal, universal practice routine? No, because each person must
design her/is own practice routine at each practice session. In other words,
this book is all about designing your own practice routines. Some differences
between a well designed routine and the intuitive routine of section II.1 are
discussed in the last paragraph of this section. A good piano teacher will
discuss the appropriate practice routines for the lesson pieces during the
lesson. Those who already know how to create practice routines might still find
this section interesting, as we will discuss many useful points (such as Bach’s
teachings and specifics on how to practice his *Invention #4*) in addition to
practice routines.

.. _III.19.a:

a. Learning the Rules
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Therefore, the first “practice routine” you should use is to follow Chapter
One, starting from the beginning and applying the concepts to a composition you
want to play. The objective is to become familiar with all the available
practice methods. Once you have some familiarity with most of the practice
methods, we are ready to design practice routines. In order to design generally
useful routines, we assume that you have had at least one year of serious piano
practice. Our objective is to learn Bach’s *Invention #4*.

.. _III.19.b:

b. Routine for Learning a New Piece
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

“Learning a new piece” means memorizing it. Therefore, without any warm-ups,
etc., immediately start memorizing Bach’s *Invention #4*, RH first, starting
with segments of one to three bars that make up a distinct phrase, then the LH;
for more details on specifics of each step of the routine, see :ref:`III.6.l`.
Continue this process until you have memorized the entire piece, HS only. Those
already good at using the methods of this book should be able to memorize the
entire Invention (not perfectly), HS, on the first day, after one or two hours
of practice (for an average person with an IQ of about 100). Concentrate only
on memorizing, and don’t worry about anything that you “cannot play
satisfactorily” (such as the 1,3 trill in the LH), and play at any speed that
is comfortable for you. If you want to memorize this piece as quickly as
possible, it is best to concentrate only on this piece and not play other
pieces. Instead of one long session of 2 hrs, you might practice 1 hr, twice
during the day. On the second day, start HT slowly, still in segments of a few
bars, and then connecting them. If you want to memorize as quickly as possible,
don’t practice anything else; even playing finger exercises to warm up will
cause you to forget some of what you just memorized.

.. _III.19.c:

c. “Normal” Practice Routines and Bach’s Teachings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

After 3 or 4 days, you can return to your “normal” practice routine. For the
“memorizing” routine, we basically did nothing but memorize because mixing
memorizing with other practice will slow down the memorizing process. In the
“normal” routine, we can take advantage of the beginning, when the hands are
still “cold” and play some finished pieces cold. Of course, you cannot play
difficult, fast pieces cold. Either play easier pieces, or play the difficult
ones slowly. A good procedure is to start with easier ones and gradually play
the harder ones. Once you become a strong enough performer so that you have no
trouble playing cold (this may take a year), this step becomes optional,
especially if you play the piano every day. If you do not play every day, you
may lose the ability to play cold if you stop practicing it. Another thing that
can be practiced during this warming-up period is scales and arpeggios; see
sections :ref:`III.4.b` and :ref:`III.5` for details on how to practice them.
You might also try the finger independence and lifting exercises of
:ref:`III.7.d`; some pianists who want to develop finger independence have a
routine of practicing these exercises once or twice every day. Start practicing
other compositions in addition to the Bach.

By this time, you should be able to play the entire Bach Invention in your
mind, HS, with no trouble. This is a good time to conduct maintenance on pieces
you had memorized previously, because learning a new piece will often result in
forgetting portions of previously learned pieces. Alternate practice between
the Bach Invention and your old pieces. You should practice the Bach HS most of
the time until you have acquired all the necessary technique. Increase speed as
quickly as you can, to speeds faster than the final speed, in short segments.
Practice mostly those sections that give you difficulty; there is no need to
practice sections that are easy for you. Once you get to a certain speed HS,
start practicing HT at a slower speed. As soon as you feel comfortable HT at a
slow speed, bring it up to a faster speed, again, in short segments. To
increase speed (HS or HT), do not use the metronome or force your fingers to
play faster. Wait until you get the feeling that the fingers WANT to go faster,
and then increase the speed by a comfortable amount. This will allow you to
practice relaxed and avoid speed walls.

In order to transition successfully from HS to HT practice, cultivate the
feeling that the two hands need each other in order to play. This will help you
to find those motions that help HT play. HS play is useful even during HT play;
for example, if you make a mistake in one hand while playing HT, you can keep
playing with the other hand and then pick up the error hand whenever you can.
Without extensive HS practice, such a feat would be impossible. You can
practice such a maneuver as part of the memorizing process – don’t wait until
recital time to try to execute it!

In order to acquire the specific techniques that Bach had in mind, we must
analyze this *Invention* in some detail. Bach’s *Inventions* were composed as
practice pieces for technique and each *Invention* teaches you specific
techniques. Therefore, we must know what skills this *Invention* is intended to
teach. Bach teaches us not only specific skills, but also HOW TO PRACTICE THEM!
That is, by analyzing the *Inventions*, we can learn many of the practice
methods of this book!! First, play the entire piece using TO. Note that Bach
inserted a maximum number of thumb crossings so that we have plenty of chances
to practice them – obviously an intentional construct. In the 212345 of the RH
in bar 1, practice pivoting around the first 2 with the hand in the glissando
position to facilitate TO.

The main theme of this *Invention* is given by the first 4 bars of the RH. This
is then repeated by the LH. Bach is telling us to practice HS! Both hands play
basically the same things, giving us the opportunity to balance the technical
levels of the two hands; this can only be achieved by HS practice and giving
the weaker hand more work. There is no better way to practice hand
independence, the principal lesson of the *Inventions*, than by practicing HS.
The section where one hand is trilling would be devilishly difficult to
practice HT from the beginning, whereas it is quite easy, HS. Some students who
do not know HS practice will try to “match” the two hands by figuring out the
trill notes ahead of time and then slowing it down for HT practice. This may be
appropriate for beginners or youngsters who have not yet learned to trill. Most
students should trill (HS) from the beginning, and work on accelerating the
trill as soon as possible. There is no need to mathematically match the two
hands; this is art, not mechanics! Bach wants you to trill one hand
independently of the other. This will allow you to play this *Invention* at any
speed without having to change the trill speed significantly. The reason why
you should not match the notes is that these trills are a device to sustain the
notes for a long time, and the individual notes have no rhythmic value. What do
you do, then, if you happen to end up with the wrong trill note at the end? You
should be able to compensate for that by either waiting briefly or changing the
speed of the trill near the end -- that is the type of skill that this
Invention teaches. Therefore, matching the trill to the other hand for practice
defeats the lessons of this *Invention*. The staccato in bars 3 and 4 of the RH
is another device for practicing hand independence; staccato in one hand versus
legato in the other requires more control than both legato. The staccato in all
similar passages should be used throughout the piece although, in many
editions, they are indicated only at the beginning.

Most Bach lesson pieces teach not only independence between the hands but also
independence of the fingers within one hand, and especially the 4th finger.
Thus in bars 11 and 13, there are 6 notes in the RH that can be played as two
triplets but are actually three doublets because of the ``3/8`` time signature.
These bars can be difficult for beginners because they require the coordination
of three difficult motions: 

#. The RH fingering symmetry is that of 2 triplets (345345 rhythm), but it must
   be played as 3 doublets (345345) 
#. At the same time, the LH must play something completely different
#. All this must be accomplished using mostly the three weakest fingers, 3, 
   4, and 5.

Bach frequently used this device of forcing you to play a rhythm that is
different from the fingering symmetry in order to cultivate finger
independence. He also tries to give the 4th finger as much work as possible, as
in the final 45.

The triplets are easier to play using 234 fingering instead of 345, especially
for larger hands, and most editions suggest the 234 fingering because most
editors did not know the concept of parallel sets (PSs). Knowledge of PS
exercises indicates that Bach’s original intent was 345 (for maximum technical
development value), and it is a “musical license” to change it to 234 in order
to facilitate musicality. That is, in any composition other than this
Invention, 234 would be the correct fingering. Use of 234 can be justified here
because it teaches the student the principle of choosing the fingering with the
greatest control. Therefore, the student can choose either fingering. A similar
situation arises in bar 38 where Bach’s original intention for the LH was
probably 154321 (a more complete PS) whereas musical license would indicate
143212 which is technically less demanding. Without help from PS exercises, the
obvious choice is the musical license. By using PS exercises, the student can
learn to use either fingering with equal ease and follow Bach’s original
intentions.

The “triplets in ``3/8`` signature” is a good example of how reading the music
incorrectly makes it difficult to get up to speed and how speed walls form.
When playing HT, you will encounter problems if you play the RH triplets in two
beats (wrong way) and the LH in three (correct). Even if you made a second
mistake of playing the LH in two beats in order to match the RH, there will be
a problem with the rhythmic change from adjacent bars. You might manage to play
through these mistakes at slow speed, but when speeded up, they become
impossible to play and you begin to build a speed wall. This is an example of
the importance of rhythm and how the wrong rhythm can make it impossible to
play at speed. It is amazing how many lessons Bach can cram into something that
looks so simple, and these complexities partly explain why, without proper
practice methods or guidance from knowledgeable teachers, many students find it
impossible to memorize Bach or to play his compositions beyond a certain speed.
The lack of proper practice methods is the main reason why so many students end
up playing so few Bach pieces.

The *Inventions* are excellent technical lesson pieces. Hanon, Czerny, etc.,
tried to achieve the same ends using what they thought were simpler, more
systematic approaches but failed because they lacked critical knowledge and
tried to simplify something that is extremely complex. Bach squeezed as many
lessons as he could into every bar, as demonstrated above. Hanon, Czerny, etc.,
must have been aware of the difficulties of learning Bach but were unaware of
good practice methods, and tried to find simpler methods of acquiring technique
by following their intuitive instincts (see :ref:`III.7.h`). This is one of the
best examples of the pitfalls of the intuitive approach.

Because the *Inventions* were composed for teaching specific skills, they can
sound somewhat constrained. In spite of this constraint, all of Bach’s lesson
pieces contain more music than practically anything ever composed and there are
enough of them to satisfy the needs of students at any level, including
beginners. If the inventions are too difficult, consider studying the large
number of delightful (and eminently performable) simpler lesson pieces Bach
composed. Most of them can be found in the *“Clavier Book of Anna Magdalena
Bach”* (his second wife). Because there are so many, most books contain only a
small number of selections. Because the Inventions are lesson pieces, almost
every edition has the critical fingerings indicated. Therefore, figuring out
the fingerings, which is extremely important, should not be a problem. “J. S.
Bach, Inventions and Sinfonias” by Willard A. Palmer, Alfred, CA,
(www.alfredpub.com) has all the non-obvious fingerings indicated, and also has
a section on how to play the ornaments.

The *Inventions* were composed by assembling well defined segments that are
usually only a few bars long. This makes them ideal for using HS segmental
practice, a key element of the methods of this book. This, and many other
properties of Bach’s compositions make them ideal music for learning the
methods of this book, and it is quite probable that they were composed with
these practice methods in mind. Bach may have been aware of most of the
practice methods of this book!

Another important lesson of Bach’s *Inventions* is PSs. The main technical
lesson of this *Invention #4* is the PS 12345, the basic set needed to play the
scale and runs. However, Bach knew that a single PS is too dangerous from a
technical point of view because you can cheat by phase locking without
acquiring technique. In order to prevent phase locking, he added one or two
notes to the PS. Now if you tried to cheat, you will be caught immediately
because the run will not come out even: Bach has given you no choice but to
acquire the required technique if you want to play this musically! Here is
another example of Bach teaching us why music and technique are inseparable (by
using music as a criterion for technique acquisition). Therefore, the quickest
way to learn to play this *Invention* is to practice the 12345 and 54321 PSs,
and learn TO. As soon as you test your fingers using these PSs, you will
understand why Bach composed this Invention. If you can do these PS exercises
satisfactorily, this piece will be quite easy, but you will find that the PSs
are not easy at all, and will probably require lots of work even if you are at
an intermediate level. First work on these PSs using only white keys; then work
on others that include black keys, as suggested by Bach. A good example is the
LH 12345 PS of bars 39-40, with the difficult 4th finger on a white key
following 3 on black.  Bach extracts the most difficult part of this PS, 2345,
and repeats it in bar 49.

Bach clearly saw the value of playing a small number of notes very quickly,
such as ornaments and trills, for developing technique (velocity). Thus his
ornaments are another key device for acquiring technique, and they are
essentially a small assemblage of PSs. There are numerous discussions on how to
play Bach’s ornaments (see Palmer, 3 paragraphs above); these discussions are
important from the point of view of correct musical expression, but we must not
miss the point that technically, ornaments in lesson pieces are an essential
device for practicing velocity, and are not just musical ornaments. Play both
the RH and LH trills with fingers 1 and 3, which will make the LH trill easier
to learn. Most students will be able to play the RH trill better than the LH
trill in the beginning; in that case, use the RH to teach the LH. This
“technique transfer” from one hand to the other is easier if both hands use
similar fingering. Because the purpose of the trill is simply to sustain the
notes, there is no specific trill speed that is required; however, try to trill
the two hands at the same speed. If you want to trill very fast, use the PSs to
practice them as described in :ref:`III.3.a`. It is important to start the
first two notes rapidly if you want to trill fast. Watch the positions of
fingers 2, 4, and 5 while trilling. They should be stationary, close to the
keys, and slightly curved.

Most students find it difficult to play these *Inventions* beyond a certain
speed, so let’s visit a practice routine for increasing speed. Using this type
of routine, you should be able to eventually play at practically any reasonable
speed, including speeds at least as fast as those of Glen Gould and other
famous pianists. We will learn to play bars 1 and 2 fast, and after that, you
should be able to figure out how to accelerate the rest. Note that these two
bars are self-cycling (see :ref:`III.2`). Try cycling it rapidly. Chances are,
you will fail because stress develops rapidly with speed. Then practice 212345
of bar 1 until it is smooth and fast. Then practice 154, then 54321 of the 2nd
bar. Then connect them, and finally, cycle the two bars. You may not be able to
complete everything the first day, but the post practice improvement will make
it easier on the second day. Using similar methods, solve all your technical
difficulties in the entire piece. The key difficulty in the LH is the 521 of
bar 4, so practice 521 PS until you can play it at any speed, completely
relaxed. Note that the 212345 of the RH and the 543212 of the LH are
thumb-passing exercises. Clearly, Bach recognized that thumb over and thumb
under are critical technical elements at high speed and created numerous
ingenious opportunities for you to practice them. Before you can play HT fast,
you must get up to HS speeds that are much faster than the HT speed you want.
“Getting up to speed” doesn’t mean just being able to attain the speed, but you
must be able to feel the quiet hands and have complete control of each
individual finger. Beginners may need months of HS practice for the higher
speeds. Many students tend to extract more speed from their fingers by playing
loud; this is not true speed, so play everything softly for these practice
sessions. When starting to play HT fast, exaggerate the rhythm -- this might
make it easier. Although most Bach compositions can be played at different
speeds, the minimum speed for the *Inventions* is the speed at which you can
feel the quiet hands when you acquire the necessary technique, because if you
don’t get up to that speed, you have missed one of his most important lessons
(quiet hands).

An intermediate level player should be able to conquer the technical
difficulties of this *Invention* in about a week. Now we are ready to practice
playing it as a piece of music! Listen to several recordings in order to get an
idea of what can be done and what you want to do. Try different speeds and
decide on your own final speed. Video record your own playing and see if the
result is visually and musically satisfactory; usually, it is not, and you will
find many improvements you will want to make. You may never be completely
satisfied even if you practiced this piece all your life.

In order to play musically, you must feel each note with the fingers before
playing it, even if it is for a split second. This will not only give you more
control and eliminate errors, but also allow you to accelerate continuously
through the keydrop so that the hammer shank is flexed by the right amount when
the hammer strikes the strings. Pretend that there is no bottom to the keydrop
and let the bottom of the keydrop stop your finger. You can do this and still
play softly. This is called “playing deeply into the piano”. You cannot “raise
your finger high and plonk it down” as Hanon recommended and expect to make
music. Such a motion can cause the hammer shank to oscillate instead of flexing
and produce an unpredictable and harsh sound. Therefore, as you practice HS,
practice for musicality, using the “flat finger positions” of :ref:`III.4.b`.
Combine these with a supple wrist. Play as much as possible with the fleshy
front pad of the finger (opposite the fingernail), not the bony fingertip. If
you video record your playing, the curled finger position will look childish
and amateurish. You cannot play relaxed until you can completely relax the
extensor muscles of the first 2 or 3 phalanges of fingers 2 to 5. This
relaxation is the essence of the flat finger positions. At first, you will be
able to include all these considerations only at slow speed. However, as soon
as you develop quiet hands, you will gain the ability to include them at higher
speeds. In fact, because these finger positions allow complete relaxation and
control, you will be able to play at much faster speed. This is one of the
(many) reasons why quiet hands is so important.

**Tone and color**: Improved tonality will be most clearly evident when playing
softly; the softer play also helps relaxation and control. The flat finger
position is what enables softer play with control. How soft is soft? This
depends on the music, speed, etc., but for practice purposes one useful
criterion is to play softer and softer until you start to miss some notes; this
level (or slightly louder) is usually the best for practicing softly. Once you
have control over tonality (sound of each individual note), try to add color to
your music (effect of groups of notes). Color for each composer is different.
Chopin requires legato, special staccato, rubato, etc. Mozart requires the
utmost attention to the expression markings. Beethoven requires uninterrupted
rhythms that run continuously over many, many bars; therefore, you need to
develop the skill for “connecting” consecutive bars in Beethoven’s music.
Bach’s *Inventions* are somewhat contrived and “boxed in” because they are
mostly confined to simple parallel sets. You can easily overcome this handicap
by emphasizing the multitude of musical concepts that give his music almost
infinite depth. The most obvious musicality comes from the harmony/conversation
between the two hands. The ending of every piece must be special, and Bach’s
endings are always convincing. Therefore, don’t just let the ending catch up to
you; make sure that the ending is purposeful. In this *Invention*, pay special
attention to bar 50, in which the two hands move in opposite directions as you
enter the authoritative ending. When you bring the music up to speed and
develop quiet hands, the 6-note runs (e.g., 212345, etc.) should sound like
rising and falling waves. The RH trill is bell-like because it is a full note,
while the LH trill is more sinister because it is a semitone. When practicing
HS, note that the RH trill is not a simple trill but it comes crashing down at
the end. Similarly, the LH trill is an introduction to the ensuing counterpoint
to the RH. You cannot bring out color unless you lift each finger at precisely
the right moment. Most of Bach’s lesson pieces contain lessons in lifting the
fingers accurately. Of course, the coloration should initially be investigated
HS. Quiet hands is also most easily acquired HS; therefore adequate HS
preparation before HT practice is of critical importance for tone and color.
Once the preparation work is done, you can start HT and bring out the
incredible richness of Bach’s music!

Tone and color have no limits in the sense that once you succeed, it becomes
easier to add more, and the music actually becomes easier to play. All of a
sudden, you may discover that you can play the entire composition without a
single audible mistake. This is probably the clearest illustration of the
statement that you cannot separate music from technique. The act of producing
good music makes you a better pianist. This provides one of the explanations of
why you have good days and bad days -- when your mental mood and finger
conditioning are just right so that you can control the tone and color, you
will have a good day. This teaches us that on bad days, you may be able to
“recover” by trying to remember the fundamentals of how you control tone and
color. This ends the discussions on *Invention #4*. We now return to the
practice routine.

You have been practicing for over one hour by now, and the fingers are flying.
This is the time when you can really make music! You must make every effort to
practice making music during at least half of the total practice time. Once you
have built up a sufficiently large repertoire, you should try to increase this
“music time” from 50% to 90%. Therefore, you must consciously set aside this
portion of your practice routine for music. Play your heart out, with all the
emotion and expression you can muster. Finding musical expression is very
exhausting; therefore, initially, it will require much more conditioning and
effort than anything you can do with Hanon. If you don’t have a teacher, the
only known ways to learn musicality are to listen to recordings and to attend
concerts. If you are scheduled to perform a particular composition in the near
future, play it slowly, or at least at a comfortable and fully controllable
speed once, before going on to something different. Expression is not important
when playing slowly. In fact, it may be beneficial to purposely play with
little expression when playing slowly before moving on to something else.

Learning Bach is strongly emphasized in this book. Why? Because Bach’s music
written for technical development is unique in piano pedagogy in its healthy,
complete, efficient, and correct approach to technique acquisition -- there is
nothing else like it. Every experienced teacher will assign some Bach pieces
for study. As mentioned above, the only reason why students do not learn more
Bach pieces is because, without the proper practice methods, they seem so
impossibly difficult. You can demonstrate to yourself the benefits of the Bach
lessons by learning five of his technical compositions and practicing them for
half a year or more. Then go back and play the most difficult pieces that you
had learned previously, and you will be amazed at the greater ease and control
that you have gained. Bach’s compositions were designed to create concert
pianists with sound fundamental technique. Chopin’s etudes were not designed
for gradual, complete technical development and many of Beethoven’s
compositions can cause hand injury and ear damage if you don’t get proper
guidance (they probably damaged Beethoven’s hearing). Neither of them teaches
you how to practice. Therefore, Bach’s compositions stand out above all others
for technical development. With the practice methods of this book, we can now
take full advantage of Bach’s resources for technical development that has been
sadly under-utilized in the past.

Of course, Hanon, etc. (there are many others, such as Cramer-Bulow) are not
even worth discussing here because they missed the most important point: that
without music, technique is not possible. But scales and arpeggios are
necessary because they form the foundation of practically anything we play. The
requirement of musicality means that you must practice them in such a way that
when others hear you playing scales, they will say “Wow!”. Then why not
practice Hanon the same way? You can, but they aren’t necessary; there is so
much better material with which to practice the art of the musician.

In summary, there is no such thing as a standard practice routine. The concept
of a fixed practice routine arose because practitioners of intuitive methods
who did not know how to teach practice methods used it because they did not
know what else to teach. To those who know the practice methods, the concept of
a standard practice routine becomes a somewhat silly idea. For example, a
standard intuitive routine might start with Hanon exercises; however, you can
quickly bring the Hanon exercises up to ridiculous speeds by applying the
methods of this book. And once you accomplish that, you begin to wonder why you
need to keep repeating this. What will you gain by playing these ridiculously
fast Hanon pieces every day?? Instead of a standard practice routine, you must
define what your objective for the practice session is, and select the practice
methods needed to achieve that goal. In fact, your practice routine will
constantly evolve during each practice session. Thus the key for designing a
good practice routine is an intimate knowledge of all the practice methods. How
different this is, from the intuitive routine described in :ref:`II.1`!
