.. _III.5:

5. Playing Fast: Scales, Arpeggios, and Chromatic Scales
--------------------------------------------------------

.. _III.5.a:

a. Scales: Thumb Under (TU), Thumb Over (TO)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Scales and arpeggios are the most basic piano passages; yet the most important
method for playing them is often not taught at all! Arpeggios are simply
expanded scales and can therefore be treated similarly to scales; thus we shall
first discuss scales and then note how similar rules apply to arpeggios. There
is one fundamental difference on how you must play the arpeggio (a flexible
wrist) compared to the scale; once you learn that difference, arpeggios will
become much easier, even for small hands.

There are two ways to play the scale. The first is the well-known "thumb under"
method (TU) and the second is the "thumb over" method (TO). In the TU method,
the thumb is brought under the hand in order to pass the 3rd or 4th finger for
playing the scale. This TU operation is facilitated by two unique structures of
the thumb; it is shorter than the other fingers and is located below the palm.
In the TO method, the thumb is treated like the other 4 fingers, thus greatly
simplifying the motion. Both methods are required to play the scale but each is
needed under different circumstances; the TO method is needed for fast,
technically difficult passages and the TU method is useful for slow, legato
passages, or when some notes need to be held while others are being played.

For lack of a better terminology, I have named the TO method “Thumb Over” which
is an obvious misnomer and might make it harder for a beginner to understand
how to play it. I have tried other names, but none of them are any better than
TO. The only possible advantage is that this outrageous nomenclature may call
attention to the existence of TO.

Many piano teachers have been totally unaware of the TO method. This presented
few difficulties as long as the students did not progress to advanced levels.
In fact, with sufficient effort and work, it is possible to play fairly
difficult passages using the TU method and there are accomplished pianists who
think that TU is the only method they need. In reality, for sufficiently fast
passages, they have subconsciously learned (through very hard work) to modify
the TU method in such a way that it approaches the TO method. This modification
is necessary because for such rapid scales, it is physically impossible to play
them using the TU method. Therefore, it is important for the student to start
learning the TO method as soon as they are past the novice stage, before the TU
habit becomes ingrained into passages that should be played TO.

Many students use the method of playing slowly initially and then ramping up
the speed. They do fine using TU at slow speed and consequently acquire the TU
habit and find out, when they get up to speed, that they need to change to the
TO method. This change can be a very difficult, frustrating, and time consuming
task, not only for scales, but also for any fast run -- another reason why the
ramping up method is not recommended in this book. The TU motion is one of the
most common causes of speed walls and flubs. Thus once the TO method is
learned, it should always be used to play runs except when the TU method gives
better results.

The main piano playing muscles for the thumb are in the forearm, just as for
the other 4 fingers. However, the thumb has other muscles in the hand that are
used to move the thumb sideways in the TU method. The involvement of these
extra muscles for the TU motion makes it a more complex operation, thus slowing
down the maximum speed attainable. The extra complication also causes mistakes.
Teachers who teach TO claim that for those who use TU exclusively, 90% of their
flubs originate with the TU motion.

You can demonstrate the disadvantage of the TU method by observing the loss of
thumb mobility in its tucked-in position. First, stretch your fingers out so
that all the fingers are in the same plane. You will find that all the fingers,
including the thumb, have mobility up and down (the motion needed to play the
piano). Now, wiggle the thumb up and down rapidly -- you will see that the
thumb can move 3 or 4 cm vertically with ease (without rotating the forearm),
quite rapidly. Then, while still wiggling at the same rapid frequency,
gradually pull the thumb under the hand -- you will see that as it goes under,
it loses vertical mobility until it becomes immobile, almost paralyzed, when it
is under the middle finger.

Now stop the wiggling and thrust the thumb down (without moving the wrist) --
it moves down! This is because you are now using a different set of muscles.
Then, using these new muscles, try to move the thumb up and down as fast as you
can -- you should find that these new muscles are much clumsier and the up and
down motion is slower than the wiggle rate of the thumb when it was stretched
out. Therefore, in order to be able to move the thumb in its tucked position,
you not only need to use a new set of muscles but, in addition, these muscles
are slower. It is the introduction of these clumsy muscles that creates
mistakes and slows down the play in the TU method. The TO method eliminates
these problems.

Scales and arpeggios are some of the most abused exercises in piano pedagogy --
novice students are taught only the TU method, leaving them unable to acquire
proper techniques for fast runs and arpeggios. Not only that but, as the scale
is speeded up, stress begins to mysteriously build up. Worse still, the student
builds up a large repertoire with wrong habits that will need to be laboriously
corrected. The TO method is easier to learn than the TU method because it does
not require the sideways contortions of the thumb, hand, arm, and elbow.
Beginners should be taught TU first because it is needed for slow passages and
takes longer to learn. The TO method should be taught as soon as faster scales
are needed, within the first two years of lessons. For talented students, the
TO method must be taught within months of their first lessons, or as soon as
they master TU.

Because there are two ways to play the scale, there are two schools of teaching
on how to play it. The TU school (Czerny, Leschetizky) claims that TU is the
only way that legato scales can be played and that, with sufficient practice,
TU can play scales at any speed. The TO school (Whitesides, Sandor) has
gradually taken over and the more insistent adherents forbid the use of TU,
under any circumstances. See the Reference section for more discussions on TU
vs. TO teaching. Both extreme schools are wrong because you need both skills.

The TO teachers are understandably angered by the fact that advanced students
passed to them by private teachers often do not know the TO method and it takes
six months or more to correct hours of repertoire that they had learned the
wrong way. One disadvantage of learning both TU and TO is that when sight
reading, the thumb might become confused and not know which way to go. This
confusion is one reason why some teachers in the TO school actually forbid the
use of TU. I recommend that you standardize to the TO method and use the TU as
an exception to the rule. Note that Chopin taught both methods (Eigeldinger, P.
37).

Although the TO method was rediscovered by Whitesides, etc., the earliest
account of its use dates back to at least Franz Liszt (Fay). Liszt is known to
have stopped performing and returned to developing his technique for over a
year when he was about 20 years old. He was dissatisfied with his technique
(especially when playing scales) when compared to the magical performances of
Paganini on the violin, and experimented with improving his technique. At the
end of this period, he emerged satisfied with his new skills but could not
teach others exactly what he had done to improve -- he could only demonstrate
on the piano (this was true of most of Liszt’s “teachings”). However, Amy Fay
noticed that he now played the scale differently; instead of TU, Liszt was
“rolling the hand over the passed finger” so that the thumb fell on the next
key. It apparently took Fay many months to imitate this method but, according
to her, “it completely changed my way of playing” and she claimed that it
resulted in a marked improvement in her technique generally, not only for
playing scales, because TO applies to any run and also to arpeggios.

.. _III.5.b:

b. The TO Motion, Explanation and Video
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Let us start by analyzing the basic fingering of scales. Consider the RH, ``C
major`` scale. We begin with the easiest part, which is the RH descending
scale, played 5432132,1432132,1 etc. Since the thumb is below the hand, the 3
or 4 finger rolls over the thumb easily, the thumb naturally folds under those
fingers, and this descending scale fingering works well. This motion is
basically the TU motion; the TO descending motion is similar, but we will need
to make a slight but crucial modification to this in order to make it into a
true TO method; however, this modification is subtle and will be discussed
later.

Now consider the RH, ``C major`` ascending scale. This is played 1231234, etc.
In the TO method, the thumb is played like the 3 and 4 fingers; i.e., it is
simply raised and lowered without the sideways TU motion under the palm. Since
the thumb is shorter than the other fingers, it can be brought down almost
parallel to (and just behind) the passed finger without colliding with it. In
order to hit the thumb on the right key, you will need to move the hand and use
a slight twitch of the wrist. For scales such as the ``C major``, both the
thumb and passed finger are on white keys and will necessarily crowd each other
somewhat. In order to avoid any possibility of collision, the arm should be
almost 45 degrees to the keyboard (pointing to the left), and the hand is
rolled over the passed finger by using the passed finger as a pivot. The 3 or 4
finger must then be quickly moved away as the thumb comes down. In the TO
method, it is not possible to hold the 3 or 4 finger down until the thumb
plays, unlike the TU method. When you first try the TO method, the scale will
be uneven and there may be a “gap” when playing the thumb. Therefore, the
transition must be very quick even in a scale played slowly. As you improve,
you will notice that a quick flick/rotation of the wrist/arm is helpful.
Beginners usually find TO to be easier than TU, but those who learned TU for
many years will initially find TO clumsy and uneven. Also, rotate the forearm
slightly clockwise (what Chopin called the “glissando position”, see
:ref:`III.5.c` below) which automatically brings the thumb forwards. The RH
ascending scale is more difficult than the descending scale because for the
descending scale, you pivot and roll over the thumb, which is easy. But for the
ascending scale, you roll over the 3 or 4 finger, but there are fingers above
the rolled finger and these can interfere with the roll.

The logic behind the TO method is the following. The thumb is used like any
other finger. The thumb only moves up and down. This simplifies the finger
motions and, in addition, the hand, arms, and elbows do not need to contort to
accommodate the TU movements. Thus the hand and arm maintain their optimum
angle to the keyboard at all times and simply glide up and down with the scale.
Without this simplification, technically difficult passages can become
impossible, especially because you still need to add new hand motions to attain
such speeds, and many of these motions are incompatible with TU. Most
importantly, the movement of the thumb to its correct location is controlled
mostly by the hand whereas in the TU method, it is the combined motion of the
thumb and hand that determines the thumb location. Because the hand motion is
smooth, the thumb is positioned more accurately than with the TU method, thus
reducing missed notes and hitting of wrong notes and at the same time bestowing
better tone control to the thumb. Also, the ascending scale becomes similar to
the descending scale, because you always roll the fingers over for passing.
This also makes it easier to play hands together since all fingers of both
hands are always rolling over. Another bonus is that the thumb can now play a
black key. It is this large number of simplifications, the elimination of the
stress that results from the paralyzed thumb, and even more advantages
discussed below, that reduce the potential for mistakes and enable faster play.
There are exceptions: slow, legato passages, or some scales containing black
keys, etc., are executed more comfortably with a TU-like motion. Most students
who had used only TU will initially have a terrible time trying to understand
how anyone can play TO. This is the clearest indication of the harm done by not
learning TO as soon as possible; for these students, the thumb is not "free".
We shall see that the free thumb is a versatile finger. But don’t despair,
because it turns out that most advanced TU students already know how to play TO
-- they just don’t know it.

The LH is the reverse of the RH; the TO method is used for the descending
scale, and the ascending scale is somewhat similar to TU. If your RH is more
advanced than the LH, perform the explorations to faster TO speeds using the RH
until you decide exactly what to do, then pick up that motion with the LH.

Because students without teachers have difficulty visualizing TO, we examine a
`video clip <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZLTbURVEEO4>`_ comparing TO and TU.

The video shows the RH playing two octaves TO, ascending and descending, played
twice. This is then repeated using TU. To non-pianists, these may appear to be
essentially the same, although the TU motion was slightly exaggerated. This
illustrates why videos of piano motions are not as helpful as one might think.
The TO motions ascending are basically correct. The TO motions descending has
one error -- a slight bending of the nail phalange of the thumb. At these
moderate speeds, this slight bending does not affect the play, but in strict
TO, the thumb should remain straight for both ascending and descending play.
This example illustrates the importance of learning TO as early as possible. My
tendency to bend the nail phalange is the result of using only TU for many
decades, before I learned TO. An important conclusion here is keep the thumb
straight at all times for TO.

.. _III.5.c:

c. Practicing TO: Speed, Glissando Motion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We now discuss procedures for practicing fast TO scales. The RH ``C major``
ascending scale consists of the parallel sets (PSs) 123 and 1234. First, use
the PS exercises (:ref:`III.7`) to attain a fast 123, with 1 on ``C4``. Then
practice 1231 with the thumb going up and then coming down behind the 3,
quickly moving the 3 out of the way as the thumb comes down. Most of the
sideways motion of the thumb is accomplished by moving the hand. The last 1 in
the 1231 is the conjunction required by the continuity rule (see :ref:`II.8`).
Repeat with 1234, with 1 on ``F4``, and then 12341, with the last 1 rolling
over, behind the 4, and landing on C5. Play fingers 234 close to the black keys
in order to give the thumb more area to land on. Turn the forearm and wrist so
that the fingertips of 2345 make a straight line parallel to the keyboard;
thus, when playing middle ``C``, the forearm should make an angle of about 45
degrees to the keyboard. Then connect the two PSs to complete the octave. After
you can do one octave, do two, etc.

When playing fast scales, the hand/arm motions are similar to those of a
glissando. The glissando type motion allows you to bring the thumb even closer
to the passed fingers because all the fingers 2 to 5 are pointing slightly
backwards. You should be able to play one fast octave (about 1 octave/sec.)
this way after a few minutes of practice (let's not worry about evenness yet!).
Practice relaxing to the point where you can feel the weight of your arm. When
you become proficient with TO, you should find that long scales are no more
difficult than short ones and that HT is not as difficult as TU. This happens
because the contortions of the elbow, etc., for TU become difficult, especially
at the high and low ends of the scales (there are many other reasons). It is
important to stress here that there is never any need to practice scales HT
and, until you become quite proficient, HT practice will do more harm than
good. There is so much urgent material we must practice HS, that there is
little to be gained by practicing HT, except for brief experimentation. Most
advanced teachers (Gieseking) consider practicing fast HT scales to be a waste
of time.

In order to control the phase angle (delay of successive fingers) in the PS
accurately, raise your wrist (ever so slightly) as you play the PSs 123 or
1234. Then make the transition to the next PS by lowering the wrist to play TO.
These wrist motions are extremely small motions, almost imperceptible to the
untrained eye, and become even smaller as you speed up. You can accomplish the
same thing by rotating the wrist clockwise (cw) to play the PSs and cycling
back by rotating ccw to lower the thumb. However, the up and down wrist motion
is preferred over the rotation because it is simpler, and the rotation can be
reserved for other uses (Sandor). If you now try to play several octaves, it
may initially come out like a washboard.

The fastest way to speed up scale playing is to practice only one octave. Once
you are up to the faster speeds, cycle 2 octaves up and down. At high speeds,
these shorter octaves are more useful because it is difficult to reverse
direction at the top and bottom, and these short octaves give you more practice
at the ends. With longer runs, you don't get to practice the ends as often, and
the added stretch of the arm to reach the higher/lower octaves is an
unnecessary distraction from concentrating on the thumb. The way to play fast
reverses at the top and bottom is to play them with a single downward pressure
of the hand. For example, to reverse at the top, play the last ascending PS,
the conjunction, and the first PS coming down, all in one downward motion. In
this scheme, the conjunction is effectively eliminated by incorporating it into
one of the PSs. This is one of the most effective ways of playing a fast
conjunction -- by making it disappear!

In the glissando motion, supinate or pronate the hands so that the fingers
point away from the direction of motion of the hand. Now the keydrop motions of
the fingers are not straight down, but have a horizontal backward component
that enables the fingertips to linger a little longer on the keys as the hand
moves along the keyboard. This is especially helpful for playing legato.
Example: for RH ascending scale, turn forearm slightly clockwise so that the
fingers point to the left. In other words, if the fingers were coming straight
down (relative to the hand) and the hand is moving, the fingers would not come
straight down onto the keys. By rotating the hand in the glissando direction,
this error can be compensated. Thus the glissando motion allows the hand to
glide smoothly. You can practice this motion by cycling one octave up and down;
the hand should resemble the sideways motion of a skater, with alternate feet
kicking sideways and the body tilting left and right while s/he skates forward.
The hand should pronate or supinate with each change of direction of the
octave. As in skating (where you must lean in the opposite direction before you
can change the direction of motion) the rotation of the hand (reversal of
glissando hand position) must precede the change in direction of the scale.
This motion is best practiced by practicing one octave only.

For the RH descending TO scale, practice the PS 54321, and the other relevant
PSs, with and without their conjunctions. You need to make a small modification
to avoid letting the thumb fold completely under the hand while the next PS is
rolling over the thumb. Lift the thumb as early as possible while keeping the
scale smooth, by raising and/or rotating the wrist to pull the thumb up --
almost the reverse of what you did for the ascending scale. If you fold the
thumb completely under the palm, it will become paralyzed and difficult to move
to the next position. This is the "slight modification" referred to above and
is somewhat similar to the thumb motion for the ascending scale. For TU play,
the thumb can be allowed to fold completely under the palm. Because this motion
is somewhat similar in TO and TU, and differ only in degree, it can be easily
played incorrectly. Although the differences in motion are small visually, the
difference in feeling to the pianist should be like night and day, especially
for fast passages.

For ultra-fast scales (over one octave per second), think not in terms of
individual notes, but in units of PSs. For the RH, naming 123=A, 1234=B, play
AB instead of 1231234, i.e., two things instead of seven. For even faster play,
think in units of pairs of PSs AB,AB, etc. As you progress in speed and start
thinking in terms of larger units, the continuity rule should be changed from
A1 to AB1 to ABA (where the final A is the conjunction). It is a bad idea to
over-practice fast, at speeds you can not comfortably manage. The forays into
very fast play are useful only for making it easier to practice accurately at a
slower speed. Therefore practice most of the time at slower than maximum speed;
you will gain speed faster that way.

Try the following experiment in order to get the feel of truly fast scales.
Cycle the 5 finger PS 54321 for the RH descending scale, according to the
scheme described in the PS exercises (start with Ex. #1). Note that, as you
increase the repetition speed, you will need to orient the hand and use a
certain amount of thrust or rotation in order to attain the fastest, smooth,
and even parallel play. You may need to study the arpeggio section below on
"thrust" and "pull" (section f) before you can do this correctly. An
intermediate level student should be able to get up to faster than 2 cycles per
second. Once you can do this rapidly, comfortably, and relaxed, simply continue
it down one octave at the same fast speed, making sure to play it TO. You have
just discovered how to play a very fast run! How fast you can play depends on
your technical level, and as you improve, this method will allow you to play
even faster scales. Do not over practice these fast runs if they start to
become uneven because you can end up with non-musical playing habits. These
experiments are valuable mainly for discovering the motions needed at such
speeds, and to train the brain to handle such speeds. Don’t get into the habit
of playing fast and listening to it; instead, the brain must first have a clear
idea of what is expected before you play it.

It is best not to start playing scales HT until you are very comfortable HS. If
you feel a need to practice scales HT (some use it for warm-ups) start HT
practice with one octave, or part of one, such as one PS. For practicing by
PSs, the ``C major`` scale is not ideal because the thumbs are not synchronized
– use ``B major``, where the thumbs of the 2 hands are synchronized, see below.
Cultivate the habit of transitioning to HT at a fast speed (although it may
seem much easier to start at slow speed and then gradually ramp up). To do
this, play one octave LH at a comfortable fast speed several times, repeat the
RH at the same speed several times, and then combine them at the same speed.
Don't worry if at first the fingers don't match absolutely perfectly. First
match the starting notes; then match both the start and final notes; then cycle
the octave continually; then work on matching every note. Then practice at slow
speed, maintaining the same motions, until the scales are very accurate and
under complete control, relaxed.

Before going too far with the ``C major`` scale, consider practicing the ``B
major`` scale.  See table below for scale fingerings. In this scale, only the
thumb and pinky play the white keys, except for the bottom finger (4) of the
LH. All other fingers play the black keys. This scale has the following
advantages:

  #. It is easier to play initially, especially for those with large hands or
     long fingers. Each key falls naturally under each finger and there is 
     plenty of room for every finger. For this reason, Chopin taught this 
     scale to beginners before teaching the ``C major`` scale.
  #. It allows you to practice playing the black keys. The black keys are more
     difficult to play (easier to miss) because they are narrower, and require
     greater accuracy.
  #. It allows play with flatter fingers (less curled), which is better for
     practicing legato and for tonal control.
  #. TO play is much easier with this scale. This is the reason why I used the
     ``C major`` scale to illustrate the TO method. With the B major, it is 
     more difficult to see the difference between the TU and TO motions. 
     However, for purposes of practicing the proper motions, ``B major`` may be
     superior, if you already understand the difference between TU and TO 
     because it is easier to get to the faster speeds without acquiring bad 
     habits.
  #. The thumbs are synchronized in the ``B major`` scale, making it possible
     to practice HT, PS by PS. Thus HT play is easier than for the ``C major``
     scale. Once you become proficient with this scale HT, learning ``C 
     major`` HT becomes simpler, thus saving you time. You will also understand
     exactly why the ``C major`` is more difficult.

This paragraph is for those who grew up learning TU only and must now learn TO.
At first, you might feel as if the fingers get all tangled up and it is
difficult to get a clear idea of what TO is. The main cause of this difficulty
is the habit you have acquired playing TU which must be unlearned. TO is a new
skill you need to learn and is no harder to learn than a Bach *Invention*. But
the best news of all is that you probably already know how to play TO! Try
playing a very fast chromatic scale. Starting with ``C``, play 13131231313...
The flat finger position may be useful here. If you can play a very fast
chromatic scale, the thumb motion is exactly the same as for TO because it is
impossible to play a fast chromatic scale TU. Now slow down this fast chromatic
thumb motion and transfer it to the ``B major`` scale; think of ``B major``
scale as a chromatic scale in which only a few white keys are played. Once you
can play the ``B major`` TO, transfer this motion to ``C major``.

Of course, learning scales and arpeggios (below) TO is only the beginning. The
same principles apply to any situation involving the thumb, in any piece of
music, anywhere that is reasonably fast. Once the scale and arpeggios are
mastered, these other TO situations should come almost as second nature. For
this to develop naturally, you must use a consistent and optimized scale
fingering; these are listed in the tables below.

Those who are new to the TO method and have learned many pieces using the TU
method will need to go back and fix all the old pieces that contain fast runs
and broken chords. Ideally, all the old pieces that were learned using TU
should be redone so as to completely get away from the TU habit where TO is
more appropriate. It is a bad idea to play some pieces TU and others TO for
similar fingerings. One way to accomplish the switch to TO is to practice
scales and arpeggios first so that you become comfortable with TO. Then learn a
few new compositions using TO. After about 6 months or so, when you have become
comfortable with TO, you can start converting all your old pieces.

TO and TU should be considered as the extremes of two different ways to use the
thumb. That is, there are many other motions in between. One unexpected benefit
of learning TO is that you become much better at playing TU. This happens
because your thumb becomes technically more capable: it becomes free. And you
gain the ability to use all those motions between TO and TU that may be
required depending on what other notes are being played or what type of
expression you want to create. The thumb is now free to use all of its
available motions and for controlling tone. This freedom, plus the ability to
now play much more technically difficult material correctly, is what transforms
the thumb into a very versatile finger.

.. _III.5.d:

d. Scales: Origin, Nomenclature and Fingerings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Repeating scales and exercises mindlessly is discouraged in this book. However,
it is critically important to develop the skill to play exquisite scales and
arpeggios, in order to acquire some basic techniques and standard fingerings
for routine playing and sight reading. Scales and arpeggios in all the major
and minor keys should be practiced until you are familiar with their
fingerings. They should sound crisp and authoritative, not loud but confident;
just listening to them should lift up one's spirits. The most important
objective to achieve is to practice until the fingering of each scale becomes
automatic.

Before describing the fingerings, let's discuss some basic properties of
scales: the key nomenclature and the question: what is a scale? There is
nothing magical or musical about the ``C major`` scale; it arises simply from
the desire to include as many chords as possible into an octave that can be
played with one hand. This is a design feature (just as the most modern
features are incorporated into every new car design) that makes it easier to
learn/play the keyboard. From the size of the human fingers/hand, we can assume
that the largest interval should span 8 keys. How many chords can these keys
accommodate? We need the octave, thirds, fourths, fifths, and sixths. Starting
from ``C4``, we have now placed ``E4``, ``F4``, ``G4``, ``A4``, and ``C5``, a
total of 6 notes, leaving space for only 2 more notes, a full tone and a
semitone. Note that even the minor third is already present as ``A4-C5``. If
you place the semitone above ``C4``, you end up with one accidental (black key)
near ``C4`` and 4 accidentals near ``C5`` in order to complete the chromatic
scale, so it is better to place the semitone near ``C5`` so that the octave is
better balanced with 2 accidentals near ``C4`` and 3 near ``C5``. This
completes the construction of the ``C major`` scale, with its accidentals
(Sabbatella, Mathiew).

In the nomenclature process, it is unfortunate that ``C major`` was not named
``A major``. Thus the octave numbers change at ``C``, not ``A``; therefore, at
``C4``, the notes are numbered ``... A3, B3, C4, D4, E4, ...`` For any scale,
the first note is called the tonic, so ``C`` is the tonic of the ``C major``
scale. The lowest note of an 88-key keyboard is ``A-1`` and the highest note is
``C8``.

The standard major scale ascending fingerings are 12312345 (RH, one octave),
54321321(LH) for ``C``, ``G``, ``D``, ``A``, ``E`` major scales (with 0,1,2,3,4
sharps, respectively); these fingerings will be abbreviated as S1 and S2, where
S stands for "standard". The sharps increase in the order ``F``, ``C``, ``G``,
``D``, ``A``, (``G major`` has ``F#``, ``D major`` has ``F#`` and ``C#``, ``A
major`` has ``F#``, ``C#``, and ``G#``, etc.) and for the ``F``, ``Bb``,
``Eb``, ``Ab``, ``Db``, ``Gb``, major scales, the flats increase in the order
``B``, ``E``, ``A``, ``D``, ``G``, ``C``; every interval between adjacent
letters is a fifth. They are therefore easy to remember, especially if you are
a violinist (the violin's open strings are ``G``, ``D``, ``A``, ``E``). The
letters always appear in the sequence ``GDAEBFC`` which represents the complete
circle of fifths, and this sequence is worth memorizing. Look at ``B`` or ``Gb
major`` scales in a music book and you will see how the 5 sharps or 6 flats
line up in the same sequence.  Thus 2 sharps will have sharps at ``F``, ``C``,
three sharps will be ``F``, ``C``, ``G``, and so on. The flats increase in
reverse order compared to the sharps. Each scale is identified by its key
signature; thus the key signature of the ``G major`` scale has one sharp
(``F#``). Once you learn to recognize the interval of a fifth, you can generate
all the scales in order of increasing sharps (by going up in fifths from ``C``)
or in order of increasing flats (by going down in fifths); this is useful when
you want to practice all the scales in sequence without having to refer to the
printed scales. See table below (:ref:`1.III.5.a`) for the ascending major
scales (reverse the fingerings for descending scales).

.. _1.III.5.a:

Table 1.III.5.a - Ascending Major Scales
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

+-------------+-------------+-----------+------------------+
| Right Hand  | Left Hand   | Scale     | Sharps / Flats   |
+=============+=============+===========+==================+
| S1=12312341 | S2=54321321 | C,G,D,A,E | 0,1,2,3,4 sharps |
+-------------+-------------+-----------+------------------+
| S1          | 43214321321 | B         | 5 sharps         |
+-------------+-------------+-----------+------------------+
| 12341231    | S2          | F         | 1 flat           |
+-------------+-------------+-----------+------------------+
| 41231234    | 32143213    | Bb        | 2 flats          |
+-------------+-------------+-----------+------------------+
| 31234123    | 32143213    | Eb        | 3 flats          |
+-------------+-------------+-----------+------------------+
| 34123123    | 32143213    | Ab        | 4 flats          |
+-------------+-------------+-----------+------------------+
| 23123412    | 32143213    | Db        | 5 flats          |
+-------------+-------------+-----------+------------------+
| 23412312    | 43213214    | Gb        | 6 flats          |
+-------------+-------------+-----------+------------------+

The minor scales are complex because there are 3 families of them, and can be
confusing because they are often just called "minor" without specifying which
of the three, or worse, each has been given several different names. They were
created because they produce moods different from the others. The simplest
minor scale is the relative minor (also called natural minor); it is simple
because it shares the same key signature as its major relative, but its tonic
moves up to the sixth note of its major relative. I find it easier to remember
this as a minor 3rd down instead of a 6th up. Thus the relative minor of ``G``
major has its tonic at ``E`` and the key signature is ``F#``, and is called ``E``
(relative) minor. Another minor is the melodic minor; it is created by raising
the 6th and 7th notes of the relative minor by a semitone only when ascending;
the descending part is unchanged. The third, and the most frequently used,
minor is the harmonic minor which is created from the relative minor by raising
the 7th note a semitone.

Fingerings for the harmonic minor scales are shown in Table 1.III.5.b (the last
column lists the raised note for the minor scale: thus ``A harmonic minor`` is
``ABCDEFG#A``, and its relative major is ``C major``). As stated earlier, there
is nothing magical about scales; they are simply human creations constructed
for convenience -- just a framework on which to hang your music. Therefore, you
can create any number of them, and the ones covered here, though most widely
used, are not the only ones.

.. _1.III.5.b:

Table 1.III.5.b Ascending Harmonic Minor Scales
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

+----------+----------+-------+----------+-----------+
| Right H  | Left H   | Scale | Signat.  | Raised N. |
+==========+==========+=======+==========+===========+
| S1(RH)   | S2(LH)   | A     | natural  | G sharp   |
+----------+----------+-------+----------+-----------+
| S1       | S2       | E     | 1 sharp  | D sharp   |
+----------+----------+-------+----------+-----------+
| S1       | 43214321 | B     | 2 sharps | A sharp   |
+----------+----------+-------+----------+-----------+
| 34123123 | 43213214 | F#    | 3 sharps | E sharp   |
+----------+----------+-------+----------+-----------+
| 34213123 | 32143213 | C#    | 4 sharps | B sharp   |
+----------+----------+-------+----------+-----------+
| 34213123 | 32143213 | G#    | 5 sharps | F sharp   |
+----------+----------+-------+----------+-----------+
| S1       | S2       | D     | 1 flat   | C sharp   |
+----------+----------+-------+----------+-----------+
| S1       | S2       | G     | 2 flats  | F sharp   |
+----------+----------+-------+----------+-----------+
| S1       | S2       | C     | 3 flats  | B natural |
+----------+----------+-------+----------+-----------+
| 12341231 | S2       | F     | 4 flats  | E natural |
+----------+----------+-------+----------+-----------+
| 21231234 | 21321432 | Bb    | 5 flats  | A natural |
+----------+----------+-------+----------+-----------+
| 31234123 | 21432132 | Eb    | 5 flats  | D natural |
+----------+----------+-------+----------+-----------+

We can never play scales too well. When practicing scales, always try to
accomplish something -- smoother, softer, clearer, faster. Make the hands
glide, the scale sing; add color, authority or an air of excitement. Quit as
soon as you start to lose concentration. There is no such thing as a maximum
speed in parallel playing. Therefore, in principle, you can keep increasing the
speed and accuracy all your life -- which can be quite a bit of fun, and is
certainly addicting. If you want to demonstrate your speed to an audience, you
can probably do that using scales and arpeggios at least as well as with any
piece of music.

.. _III.5.e:

e. Arpeggios (Chopin’s FI, Cartwheel Motion, Finger Splits)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Playing arpeggios (arps) correctly is technically complex. This makes arps
particularly suitable for learning some important hand motions, such as thrust,
pull, and the "cartwheel motion". "Arpeggio", as used here, includes broken
chords and combinations of short arpeggic passages. We shall illustrate these
concepts here using Beethoven's *Moonlight Sonata* (3rd Movement) for the
thrust and pull, and Chopin's *Fantaisie Impromptu* (FI) for the cartwheel
motion.  Recall that suppleness of the hands, especially at the wrist, is
critical for playing arps. The technical complexity of arps arises from the
fact that in most cases, this suppleness must be combined with everything else:
thrust, pull, cartwheel motion, glissando (or finger splits) motion, and TU or
TO. One note of caution: the Moonlight is difficult because of the required
speed. Many Beethoven compositions cannot be slowed down because they are so
intimately tied to rhythm. In addition, this movement requires a minimum reach
of a 9th, comfortably. Those with smaller hands will have more difficulty
learning this piece than those with adequate reach.

Let’s first discuss how to play TO arps. Arps extending over several octaves
are played TO just like scales. Therefore, if you know how to play TO scales,
you know, in principle, how to play TO arps. However, the method of playing TO
arps is a more extreme example of the TO motion than for scales and therefore
serves as the clearest example of this motion. We noted above that the easiest
TO motion is that used in playing chromatic scales (1313123131312 ... for the
RH). The chromatic TO motion is easy because the horizontal motion of the thumb
is small. The next slightly more difficult motion is that for playing the ``B
major`` scale. This TO motion is easy because you can play the entire scale
with flat fingers so that there is no collision problem with the passing thumb.
The next in difficulty is the ``C major`` scale; it is more difficult because
all the fingers are crowded into the narrow white key area. Finally, the most
difficult motion is the TO arp in which the hand must move rapidly and
accurately. This motion requires a slight flex and flick of the wrist,
sometimes described as a “throwing” motion. The nice thing about acquiring the
TO arp motion is that, once you learn it, you simply have to make a smaller
version of the same motion in order to play the easier TO motions.

The standard fingering for the ``CEGCEG ... C`` arp is 123123....5, RH, and
5421421....1, LH ascending, and reverse for descending. See Michael Aaron,
Adult Piano Course, Book Two for fingerings of all arps and scales.

Because arps jump over several notes, most people spread the fingers to reach
those notes. For fast arps, this is a mistake because spreading the fingers
slows down their motion. The key method for fast arps is to move the hand
instead of spreading the fingers. If you move the hand and wrist appropriately,
you will find that it is not necessary to spread the fingers. This method also
makes it easier to relax.

**The Cartwheel Method** (Chopin's *FI*): In order to understand the cartwheel
motion, place your left palm flat on the piano keys, with the fingers spread
out like the spokes of a wheel. Note that the fingertips from pinky to thumb
fall on an approximate semi-circle. Now place the pinky above ``C3`` and parallel
to it; you will have to rotate the hand so that the thumb is closer to you.
Then move the hand towards the fallboard so that the pinky touches the
fallboard; make sure that the hand is rigidly spread out at all times. If the
4th finger is too long and touches the fallboard first, rotate the hand
sufficiently so that the pinky touches the fallboard, but keep the pinky as
parallel to ``C3`` as possible. Now rotate the hand like a wheel counter clockwise
(as viewed from above) so that each successive finger touches the fallboard
(without slipping) until you reach the thumb. This is the cartwheeling motion
in the horizontal plane. If your normal reach is one octave with your fingers
spread out, you will find that the cartwheeling motion will cover almost two
octaves! You gain extra reach because this motion makes use of the fact that
the center three fingers are longer than the pinky or thumb, and the
circumference of a semi-circle is much larger than the diameter. Now repeat the
same motion with the hand vertical (palm parallel to fallboard), so the fingers
point downwards. Start with the pinky vertical and lower the hand to play ``C3``.
Now if you roll the hand up towards ``C4``, (don't worry if it feels very awkward),
each finger will "play" the note that it touches. When you reach the thumb, you
will again find that you have covered a distance almost twice your normal
reach. In this paragraph, we learned three things:

  #. How to "cartwheel" the hand
  #. This motion expands your effective reach without making any jumps
  #. The motion can be used to "play" the keys without moving the fingers 
     relative to the hand.

In actual practice, cartwheeling is used with the hand somewhere between
vertical and horizontal, and the fingers will be in the pyramid position or
slightly curved. Although cartwheeling will add some keydrop motion, you will
also move the fingers in order to play.

Believe it or not, the reach can be stretched even more by use of “finger
splits” (Fraser), which is a form of glissando motion. Picture applying an
exaggerated glissando motion to the arp, RH, ascending, ``CEGCEG...`` ; you can
now spread the distance between fingers more than the cartwheel. To demonstrate
this, make a “V” with fingers 2 & 3 and place the “V” on a flat surface, at the
edge, so that only the “V” is on the surface. Spread the “V” as far as you can
with comfort and ease. Then rotate your arm and hand 90 degrees clockwise so
the fingers are now touching the surface with their sides. This is an
exaggerated glissando position. Now you can spread the fingers even more. This
works with any pair of fingers.

Therefore, by using a combination of TO, FFP, cartwheel motion and finger
splits, you can easily reach and play fast arps with little stress on the
stretching muscles. Notice that this complex combination of motions is enabled
by a supple wrist. Once you become comfortable with this combination of
motions, you will have enough control so that you gain the confidence that you
will never miss a note. Practice the ``CEG`` arp using these motions.

We apply this method to the LH broken chords of Chopin's *FI*. In :ref:`III.2`,
we discussed the use of cycling to practice the LH. We will now add the
cartwheel motion, etc., to the cycling. Cycle the first 6 (or 12) LH notes of
bar 5 (where the RH first joins in). Let’s start with just the cartwheel
motion. If you position the hand almost horizontally, then practically all the
keydrop must be accomplished by finger motion. However, if you raise the hand
more and more towards the vertical, the cartwheeling motion will contribute
more keydrop and you will need less finger motion to play. Cartwheeling is
especially useful for those with small hands because it automatically expands
the reach. Cartwheeling also makes it easier to relax because there is less
need to keep the fingers spread widely apart. You will also find that your
control increases because the motions are now partly governed by the large
motions of the hand which makes the playing less dependent on the motion of
each finger and gives more uniform, even results. Use as much FFP as you need,
and add a small amount of glissando motion.

The RH is an even bigger challenge. Most of the fast runs should be practiced
using the basic keystroke (practicing slowly) and parallel sets (for speed).
The part starting at bar 13 should be practiced like the tremolo (section 3.b),
and then applying the parallel sets. That is, practice first (slowly) using
only the fingers with no hand motion. Then use mostly arm/hand rotation to play
the 15. Exaggerate these motions while practicing slowly; then gradually speed
up by reducing each motion, then combine them to play even faster. Then apply
parallel sets, playing all 4 notes in one down motion of the hand. Play white
keys with curled fingers and black keys with FFP. Use the palm widening muscles
(:ref:`III.7.e`) instead of the finger spreading muscles and practice rapid
relaxation after playing each 15 octave.

.. _III.5.f:

f. Thrust and Pull, Beethoven's Moonlight, 3rd Movement
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For those who are learning Beethoven’s *Moonlight Sonata* for the first time,
the most difficult section is the two-hand arpeggic ending of the 3rd movement
(bars 196-198; this movement has 200 bars). By illustrating how to practice
this difficult passage, we can demonstrate how arpeggios should be practiced.
Let's try the RH first. In order to simplify the practice, we skip the first
note of bar 196 and practice only the following 4 ascending notes (``E``,
``G#``, ``C#``, ``E``), which we will cycle. As you cycle, make an elliptical,
clockwise motion (as seen from above) of the hand. We divide this ellipse into
two parts: the upper part is the half towards the piano and the lower part is
the half towards your body. When playing the upper half, you are "thrusting"
your hand towards the piano, and when playing the lower half, you are "pulling"
the hand away from it. First, play the 4 notes during the upper half and return
the hand to its original position using the lower half. This is the thrust
motion for playing these 4 notes. Your fingers tend to slide towards the piano
as you play each note. Now make a counter clockwise motion of the hand and play
the same 4 ascending notes during the lower half of the ellipse. Each finger
tends to slide away from the piano as it plays each note. Those who have not
practiced both motions may find one much more awkward than the other. Advanced
players should find both motions equally comfortable.

The above was for the RH ascending arp. For the RH descending arp, let's use
the first 4 notes of the next bar (same notes as in preceding paragraph, an
octave higher, and in reverse order). Again, the pull motion is needed for the
lower half of the clockwise motion, and the thrust is used for the upper half
of the counter clockwise rotation. For both ascending and descending arps,
practice both thrust and pull until you are comfortable with them. Now see if
you can figure out the corresponding exercises for the LH. Notice that these
cycles are all parallel sets and therefore can eventually be played extremely
fast.

Having learned what the thrust and pull motions are, you might reasonably ask,
"why do you need them?" First, it should be pointed out that the thrust and
pull motions use different sets of muscles. Therefore, given a specific
application, one motion has to be better than the other. We will learn below
that one motion is stronger than the other. Students who are not familiar with
these motions may randomly pick one or switch from one to the other without
even knowing what they did. This can result in unexpected flubs, unnecessary
stress, or speed walls. The existence of the thrust and pull is analogous to
the situation with TU and TO. Recall that by learning both TU and TO, you get
to fully utilize all the capabilities of the thumb. In particular, at high
speed, the thumb is used in a way which is about midway between TU and TO;
however, the important thing to keep in mind is that the thumb motion must be
on the TO side of dead center. If you are even slightly on the TU side, you hit
a speed wall.

.. note::
   I need to implement MathJax in order to clean up this math...

The analogy of thrust and pull to TU and TO go even further, because thrust and
pull also have a neutral motion, just as TU and TO have a range of motions in
between. You get the neutral motion by reducing the minor axis of the ellipse
to zero; i.e., you simply translate the hand right and left without any
apparent elliptical motion. But here again, it makes a big difference whether
you approach the neutral position from the thrust side or the pull side,
because the seemingly similar neutral motions (approached from thrust or pull
side) are actually being played using a different set of muscles. Let me
illustrate this with a mathematical example. Mathematicians will be horrified
if you tell them that 0 = 0, which at first glance seems to be trivially
correct. Reality, however, dictates that we must be very careful. This is
because we must know the true meaning of zero; i.e., we need a mathematical
definition of zero. It is defined as the number 1/N, when N is allowed to go to
infinity. You get to the "same" number zero, whether N is positive or negative!
Unfortunately, if you try to divide by zero: 1/0, you get a different answer
depending on whether N is positive or negative. 1/0 = ∞ when N is positive, and
1/0 = -∞ when N is negative! If you had assumed the two zeros to be the same,
your error after the division could have been as large as two infinities
depending on which zero you used! In a similar way, the "same" neutral
positions achieved by starting with TU or TO are fundamentally different, and
similarly with thrust and pull. That is, under certain circumstances, a neutral
position approached from either thrust or pull is better. The difference in
feel is unmistakable when you play them. This is why you need to learn both.

This point is so universally important, especially for speed, that I will
illustrate it with another example. The Samurai's life depends on the speed of
his sword. In order to maximize this speed, the sword must always be in motion.
If he simply raises the sword, stops, and lowers it, the motion is too slow and
his life is endangered. The sword must continually move in some circular,
elliptical, or curved motion, even when it looks like he is simply raising and
lowering it. This is one of the first lessons in swordsmanship. Thus the use of
generically circular motions to increase speed has universal validity (tennis
serve, badminton slam, etc.), and applies to the piano also.

OK, so we have established that thrust and pull are both needed, but how do we
know when to use which? In the case for TU and TO, the rules were clear; for
slow passages you can use either one, and for certain legato situations, you
need TU; for all others you should use TO. For arps, the rule is to use the
strong motions as a first choice and the weak motions as a secondary choice.
Each person has a different strong motion, so you should first experiment to
see which is strongest for you. The pull motions should be stronger because our
pulling muscles in the arms are stronger than the pushing muscles. Also, the
pull motions use the fleshy parts of the fingers whereas the thrust motions
tend to use the fingertips which tends to injure the fingertips and to strain
the attachment of the fingernails.

Finally, one can ask the question, "why not always play neutral - neither
thrust nor pull?" Or learn one (pull only), and become very good at it? Here
again, we are reminded of the fact that there are two ways to play neutral
depending on whether you approach it from the thrust side or pull side, and for
a particular application, one is always better than the other. As for the
second question, a second motion may be useful for endurance because it uses a
different set of muscles. Not only that, but in order to play the strong
motions well, you must know how to play the weak motions. That is, you play
best when the hand is balanced in the sense that it can play both motions.
Therefore, whether you decide to use thrust or pull for a particular passage,
you should always practice the other one also. That is the only way that you
will know which motion is best for you. For example, as you practice this
ending of Beethoven's sonata, you should find that you make faster technical
progress by practicing every cycle using both thrust and pull. In the end, most
students should end up playing very close to neutral, although a few may decide
to use exaggerated thrust or pull motions.

There is much more new material to practice in this 3rd movement before we
should be playing HT, so at this stage, you probably do not need to practice
anything HT, except as experimentation to see what you can or cannot do. In
particular, trying HT at the highest speeds will be counter-productive and is
not recommended. However, cycling a short segment HT can be quite beneficial;
but this should not be over-practiced if you still cannot play it
satisfactorily HS. The main difficulties in this movement are concentrated in
the arps and Alberti accompaniments ("do-so-mi-so" type); once these are
mastered, you have conquered 90% of this movement. For those without sufficient
technical skill, you should be satisfied with getting up to about quarter-note
= ``120 BPM``. Once you can play the entire movement comfortably at that speed, you
might try to mount an effort towards presto (above 160). It is probably not a
coincidence that with the ``4/4`` signature, presto corresponds to the rapid heart
beat rate of a very excited person. Note how the LH accompaniment of bar 1
actually sounds like a beating heart.

We shall now outline our plan of attack for learning this movement. We started
with the most difficult part, the two-hand arp at the end. Most students will
have more difficulty with the LH than the RH; therefore, once the RH is fairly
comfortable, start practicing the RH arp of the first two bars of this
movement, while still practicing the LH part of the ending. One important rule
for playing arps rapidly is to keep the fingers near the keys as much as
possible, almost touching them. Do not lift the fingers far off the keys.
Remember to use flat finger positions for black keys and the curled position
for white keys. Thus in the first 2 bars of this 3rd movement, only the ``D``
is played with curled fingers. This habit of curling only specific fingers for
each ascending arp is best cultivated by cycling parallel sets. Clearly, a
major technical skill you must learn is the ability to quickly change any
finger from flat to curl, independently of the others.

The pedal is used in only two situations in this piece: 

  #. At the end of bar 2, at the double staccato chord and all following similar
     situations
  #. Bars 165-166, where the pedal plays a critical role

The next segment to practice is the tremolo type RH section starting at bar 9.
Work out the fingering of the LH carefully -- those with smaller hands may not
be able to hold the 5th finger down for the duration of the 2 bars. If you have
difficulty interpreting the rhythm of this section, listen to several
recordings to get some ideas. Then comes the LH Alberti accompaniment starting
at bar 21, and similar RH parts that appear later. The Alberti accompaniment
can be practiced using parallel sets, as explained starting at section II.8.
The next difficult segment is the RH trill of bar 30. This first trill is best
performed using 3,5 fingering and the second one requires 4,5. For those with
small hands, these trills are as difficult as the ending arps, so they should
be practiced from the very beginning, when you first start learning this
movement. These are the basic technical requirements of this piece. The cadenza
of bar 186 is an interesting combination of a "scale" and an arp; if you have
difficulty interpreting it, listen to several recordings to get some ideas.
Don't overlook the fact that bars 187 and 188 are adagio.

Start HT practice after all these technical problems are solved HS. There is no
need to practice using the pedal until you start HT. Note that bars 163, 164,
are played without pedal. Then application of the pedal to bars 165, 166, gives
meaning to these last 2 bars. Because of the fast pace, there is a tendency to
practice too loud. This is not only musically incorrect, but technically
damaging. Practicing too loud can lead to fatigue and speed walls; the key to
speed is relaxation. It is the P sections that create most of the excitement.
For example, the *ff* of bar 33 is only a preparation for the following *p*, and in
fact, there are very few *ff*'s in the entire movement. The whole section from
bar 43 to 48 is played *p*, leading to just one bar, #50, played *f*.

Finally, if you have practiced correctly, you should find certain speeds at
which it is easier to play faster than slower. This is completely natural in
the beginning, and is one of the best signs that you have learned the lessons
of this book well. Of course, once you have become technically proficient, you
should be able to play at any speed with equal ease.

.. _III.5.g:

g. Thumb: The Most Versatile Finger
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The thumb is the most versatile finger; it lets us play scales, arpeggios, and
wide chords (if you don't believe it, try playing a scale without the thumb!).
Most students do not learn how to use the thumb correctly until they practice
scales. Therefore it is important to practice scales as soon as possible.
Repeating the ``C major`` scale over and over, or even including the ``B
major``, is not the way to practice scales. It is important to practice all the
major and minor scales and arpeggios; the objective is to ingrain the correct
fingering of each scale into the fingers.

Play with the tip of the thumb, not the first joint. This makes the thumb
effectively as long as possible, which is needed because it is the shortest
finger. In order to produce a smooth scale, all the fingers need to be as
similar as possible. In order to play with the tip of the thumb, you may have
to raise the wrist slightly. Using the tip is helpful at high speeds, for
better control, and for playing arpeggios and chords. Playing with the tip
facilitates TO and the "glissando motion" in which the fingers point away from
the direction of motion of the hand. Do not exaggerate the glissando motion,
you only need a small amount.

It is most important to liberate the thumb by practicing TO and a very flexible
wrist. Except for TU, the thumb is always straight and is played by pivoting at
the wrist joint and is moved into position by wrist and hand motion. One of
Liszt’s most significant technical improvements occurred when he learned to use
the thumb correctly.

.. _III.5.h:

h. Fast Chromatic Scales
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The chromatic scale consists of semitone steps. The most important
consideration for chromatic scales is the fingering, because there are so many
ways to finger them. The standard fingering, starting from ``C``, is
1313123131345 for ascending RH, and 1313132131321 for ascending LH for one
octave (the top is fingered for a return) and the reverse for descending. This
fingering is difficult to play fast because it is composed of the shortest
possible parallel sets and therefore contains the largest number of
conjunctions; it is usually the conjunctions that limit the speed. Its main
advantage is simplicity which makes it applicable to practically any chromatic
segment, starting from any note, and is the easiest to remember. One variation
of this is 1212123121234, which enables a little more speed and legato, and is
more comfortable for those with large hands.

In attempts to speed up the chromatic scale, several sequences using longer
parallel sets have been devised; all of the "accepted" sequences avoid the use
of the thumb on a black key. The most commonly used is, starting from ``E``,
123123412312 (Hauer, Czerny, Hanon). One complication with this fingering is
that the starting sequence should be changed depending on the starting key in
order to maximize velocity. Also, the RH and LH are different; this sequence
uses 4 parallel sets. You can shrink it to 3 parallel sets by playing, starting
at ``C``, 123412312345. With good TO technique, this scale might be playable,
but even with TO, we rarely use a 51 or 15 transition, which is difficult.
Clearly, the restriction of avoiding the thumb on a black key limits the choice
of fingering and complicates matters because the fingering will depend on the
starting note.

If we allow one thumb on a black key, a good scale is, starting from C:

  * 1234,1234,1234; 1234,1234,12345, 2 octaves RH ascending,
  * 5432,1432,1432; 1432,1432,14321, 2 octaves LH ascending,

with the thumb on ``G#`` for both hands and 3 identical parallel sets per
octave - the simplest and fastest possible configuration. Reverse to descend. I
call this the "4-finger chromatic scale"; as far as I know, this fingering has
not been discussed in the literature because of the thumb on a black key
followed by passing over the 4th finger. In addition to speed, the biggest
advantage is simplicity; you use the same fingering no matter where you start
(for example, use finger 3 for starting the RH with ``D``), ascending or
descending, the fingering is the same for both hands (in reverse), the thumbs
and fingers 3 are synchronized, and the beginning and end is always 1,5. With
good TO technique, this scale is unbeatable; you only need to pay attention to
the 14 or 41 where 1 is on ``G#``. Try this on the last chromatic run in the
Grave of Beethoven’s *Pathetique* and you should notice a marked decline in the
number of flubs and eventually a significant increase in speed. Once you learn
it for this run, it will work for any other chromatic run. In order to develop
a smooth run, practice with the beat on every note, every other note, every
third note, etc.

In summary, although most exercises are not helpful, exercising scales,
arpeggios and the 4-finger chromatic scale have a special place in piano
technique acquisition. Because you can use them to learn so many fundamental
technical skills, they must be part of a pianist’s daily practice program.
