.. _III.17:

17. Upright, Grand & Electronic Pianos; Purchasing and Care
-----------------------------------------------------------

.. _III.17.a:

a. Grand, Upright, or Electronic?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Grands have certain advantages over uprights. However, these advantages are
minor compared to the importance of the skill level of the pianist. There are
great pianists who became technically advanced practicing mostly on uprights.
There is no evidence that you need a grand for initial technical development,
although a few piano teachers will insist that any serious student must
practice on a grand. An argument can be made in favor of uprights, at least for
beginners, because uprights require firmer playing and may be better for early
finger development (you need to press harder in order to make louder sounds).
They may be superior even for intermediate students because uprights are less
forgiving and require greater technical skill to play. These arguments are
controversial, but do illustrate the point that, for students up to
intermediate level, any differences among uprights and grands are small
compared to other factors such as student motivation, quality of teachers,
practice methods, and proper piano maintenance.

Another factor is piano quality: good uprights are superior to low quality
grands (which includes most grands under 5.2 feet). The rule concerning
uprights is simple: if you already have one, there is no reason to get rid of
it until you buy an electronic or a grand; if you don't have a piano, there is
no compelling reason to buy an upright. Students above intermediate level will
need a grand piano because the most technically difficult music is harder (if
not impossible) to play on most uprights and electronics.

Electronics are fundamentally different from acoustics (grands and uprights).
The construction of their actions is not as good (not as expensive) and most
electronics do not have good enough speaker systems to compete with the
acoustics. Acoustics, therefore, produce sound in a fundamentally different way
which causes many critics to favor acoustics because of better control over
“tone”. Thus the question of which instrument is best is a complex one
depending on the person’s circumstances, and specific requirements. We will now
discuss each type below so that we can make an intelligent decision on which
type of instrument is best for which student.

.. _III.17.b:

b. Electronic Pianos
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _Pianoteq: http://www.pianoteq.com/
.. _Well Temperaments: http://en.wikipedia.org/Equal_Temperament

.. warning::
   This book was published back in 2009, some of this information may be out
   of date. Take it with a grain of salt.

Today's electronic (or digital) pianos are still inferior to good grands for
technical development but are improving rapidly. Even the best electronics are
inadequate for advanced pianists; their mechanical response is poorer, the
musical output and dynamic range are inferior, and fast, technically advanced
material becomes difficult to execute. Most inexpensive speakers can not
compete with the soundboard of a grand. The electronic pianos do not allow the
control of tone, color, pianissimo, staccato, and the special manipulations of
the damper and soft pedals, that good grands provide. Thus there is no question
that an advanced pianist will prefer a grand piano over an electronic; however,
this conclusion assumes that the grand is tuned at least twice a year, and is
regulated and voiced whenever necessary. Most uprights do not provide
sufficient advantage for technical development to warrant their use over
quality electronics that are readily available, comparatively inexpensive, and
costs little to maintain.

The electronic pianos have some unique advantages, so we discuss them here.
Because of these advantages, most serious pianists will own both an acoustic
and an electronic:

#. For less than half the price of an average acoustic upright, you can buy a
   new electronic piano with all the features you need: headphone and volume
   control, touch control, organ, string, harpsichord, metronome, recording and
   midi/analog out, transposition, different tunings and canned accompaniments.
   Most electronics provide much more, but these are the minimum features you
   can expect. The argument that an acoustic piano is a better investment than 
   an electronic is false because an acoustic piano is not a good investment,
   especially when the initial cost is so much higher and initial depreciation
   is large. The electronic piano requires no maintenance, whereas the 
   maintenance costs of acoustics are substantial, since they require tuning,
   voicing, and regulation about twice a year, plus occasional repairs.
#. The electronics are always in perfect tune. Very young children exposed
   sufficiently to perfectly tuned pianos acquire absolute pitch automatically,
   although most parents never discover this because, if it is not discovered
   and maintained, it is lost during the teen years. The acoustic piano begins
   to go out of tune the minute the tuner leaves your house, and some notes 
   will be out of tune most of the time (in fact, most of the notes will be out
   of tune most of the time). However, these small deviations from tuning will
   not affect the learning of absolute pitch unless the piano is allowed to go
   way out of tune. Because too many acoustic pianos are inadequately maintained,
   the fact that the electronics are always in tune can be a big advantage. The 
   importance of a well tuned piano for musical and technical development cannot
   be over-emphasized, because without the musical development, you will never 
   learn how to perform. The sound of an electronic can be greatly improved by 
   hooking it up to a set of good speakers or sound system.
#. You can use headphones or adjust the volume so that you can practice without
   disturbing others. The ability to turn down the volume is also useful for
   reducing ear damage when practicing loud passages: an important factor for
   anyone over 60 years old, when many will start to suffer from hearing loss or
   tinnitus. If you are an advanced player, even an electronic will create
   considerable "playing noise" (with the volume turned off) that can be quite
   loud to anyone nearby and these vibrations can transmit through the floor to
   rooms under the piano. Therefore it is a mistake to think that the sound from
   an electronic (or an acoustic with "silent" feature) can be completely turned
   off. 
#. They are more portable than acoustics. Although there are light keyboards
   with similar features, it is best for piano practice to use the heavier
   electronics so that they do not shift while playing loud, fast music. Even
   these heavier electronics can be easily carried by two persons, and will fit
   in many cars.
#. Variable touch weight is more important than many people realize. However,
   you have to know what "touch weight" means before you can use it to 
   advantage; see the following paragraphs for details. In general, the touch 
   weight of electronics is a little lighter than that of acoustics. This 
   lighter weight was chosen for two reasons: to make it easier for keyboard 
   players to play these electronics (keyboards are even lighter), and to make 
   them easier to play compared to the acoustics. The disadvantage of the 
   lighter weight is that you may find it slightly more difficult to play an 
   acoustic after practicing on an electronic. The touch weight of acoustics
   needs to be heavier in order to produce a richer tone. One advantage of 
   heavier weight is that you can feel the keys of an acoustic while playing,
   without inadvertently playing some wrong notes. However, this can also lead
   to careless playing with some inadvertent finger motions because you can 
   lightly hit a key of an acoustic without making any sound. You can practice
   getting rid of these uncontrolled motions by practicing on an electronic and 
   choosing a light touch weight so that any inadvertent strike will produce a
   sound. Many people who practice only on acoustics don't even know that they 
   have such uncontrolled motions until they try to play on an electronic, and
   find out that they are hitting a lot of extra keys. The light touch is also
   useful for acquiring difficult technique quickly. Then, if you need to play
   on an acoustic later on, you can practice with increased weight after you
   acquire the technique. This two-step process is usually faster than trying
   to acquire technique at heavy key weight.
#. Recording piano music is one of the most difficult things to do using
   conventional recording equipment. With an electronic piano, you can do it
   with the push of a button! You can easily build up an album of all the pieces
   you learned. Recording is one of the best ways not only to really finish and
   polish your pieces but also to learn how to perform for an audience. Everyone
   should cultivate a habit of recording every finished piece from the very
   beginning of her/is lessons. Of course, the initial performances will not be
   perfect, so you may want to go back and re-record them as you improve. Too
   many students never record their performances, which is the main reason for
   excessive nervousness and difficulties during performances.
#. Most pianists who follow good practice methods and become proficient when
   young will end up composing their own music. Electronic pianos are helpful
   for recording your compositions so that you don't need to write them down,
   and for playing them in different instruments, as appropriate for each 
   composition.  With some additional software or hardware, you can even compose
   entire symphonies and play every instrument yourself. There is even software
   that will transcribe (though imperfectly) your music onto sheet music.
   However, there is nothing like a quality grand to help you compose – the 
   sound from a great piano somehow inspires the composing process; therefore,
   if you are a serious composer, most electronics will be inadequate.
#. If you can acquire technique rapidly, there is nothing stopping you from
   broadening your horizon beyond classical music and playing popular music,
   jazz, blues, etc. You will appeal to a wider audience if you can mix music
   genres and you will have more fun. The electronic piano can help by providing
   the accompaniments, drums, etc., for those types of music. Thus these extra
   capabilities of the electronic pianos can be very useful and should not be
   ignored. They are more easily transportable for gigs.
#. Buying electronic pianos is very simple, especially when compared to buying
   acoustics (see :ref:`III.17.e`). All you need to know is your price range,
   the features you want, and the manufacturer. You don't need an experienced
   piano technician to help you evaluate the piano. There are no questions about
   whether the piano dealer made all the proper "prepping", whether the dealer
   will honor the agreements to ensure that the piano functions after delivery, 
   whether the piano was properly "stabilized" during the first year of 
   ownership, or whether you got one with good or inferior tone and touch. Many 
   established manufacturers, such as Yamaha, Roland, Korg, Technic, Kawai, and
   Kurzweil, produce electronics of excellent quality.
#. And this is only the beginning; electronics will improve in leaps and bounds
   with time. One recent development is piano modeling (see `Pianoteq`_), 
   instead of the sampling used before. Good sampling requires a tremendous 
   amount of memory and processing power, which can slow down the piano response.
   Modeling is more versatile and enables things you can not do even on a grand,
   such as partial soft pedal, control the hammer shank flex or let you play 
   Chopin’s *Pleyel*.
#. We should all move towards WT (`Well Temperaments`_) and away from ET (Equal
   Temperament that is universally accepted today). Once you decide to use WT,
   you will need several of them. Learning to discern and bring out key color is 
   a most valuable skill. ET is the worst tuning for this. With electronic 
   pianos, you can get most of the common WTs.

The touch weight of a piano is not a simple matter of adding or subtracting
lead weights to the keys to change the force required to depress them. The
touch weight is a combination of the down weight, the inertia of the keys and
hammers, and the force required to produce a certain volume of sound. The down
weight is the maximum weight that the key will support before it will start to
move down. This is the weight that is adjusted using lead weights, etc. The
down weight of all pianos, including the "weighted key" electronics, is
standardized at about 50 grams and varies little from piano to piano regardless
of touch weight. When playing a piano, this 50 gram weight is a small fraction
of the force required to play -- most of the force is used to produce the
sound. In acoustic pianos, this is the force needed to impart velocity to the
hammer. In electronics, it is the electronic reaction to the key motion and a
fixed mechanical resistance. In both cases, you also have to overcome the
inertia of the mechanism in addition to supplying the force for producing the
sound. For example, when playing staccato, most of the force required is for
overcoming the inertia whereas when playing legato, the inertial component is
small. Electronics have a smaller inertial component because they have only the
inertia of the keys whereas the acoustics have the additional inertia of the
hammers; this makes the acoustics less sensitive to inadvertent hitting of the
keys. Therefore, you will feel the most difference between acoustics and
electronics when playing fast or staccato and little difference when playing
slow legato. For the pianist, touch weight is the effort required to produce a
certain volume of sound and has little to do with down weight. For acoustics,
touch weight is determined mostly by hammer mass and voicing (hardness of the
hammer). There is only a narrow range of hammer masses that is ideal because
you want heavier hammers for larger sound but lighter ones for faster action.
Thus a lot of the touch weight can be adjusted by the piano technician by
hammer voicing, rather than by changing the down weight. For electronic pianos,
touch weight is controlled in the software by switching to the sound of a
softer hammer for heavier touch weight and vice versa, which simulates an
acoustic grand; there is no mechanical change to the down weight of the keys or
the inertial component. Thus if you switch to the heaviest key weight, you
might feel that the sound is somewhat muffled and if you switch to the lightest
weight, the sound might be more brilliant. In electronic pianos, it is easier
to decrease the touch weight without adversely affecting the sound because
there is no hammer to adjust. On the other hand, the maximum dynamic range of
most electronic pianos is limited by the speakers, so that it is generally
easier to play a larger dynamic range with acoustic grands. In summary, touch
weight is mainly a subjective judgment by the pianist about how much effort is
required to produce a certain volume of sound; it is not the down weight
(resistance of the keys to the keydrop). Some pianists have asked their tuners
to increase the down weight (with the hope of increasing finger strength), but
this throws the piano out of regulation and is bad for technical development
(velocity, musicality).

You can demonstrate this subjective judgment by turning the volume up or down
using the electronic piano and trying to achieve the same loudness. Thus if you
practice on an electronic for a long time with the volume turned down, and then
play an acoustic, the acoustic can feel downright light. Unfortunately, things
are a little more complicated because when you switch to a heavier touch weight
with the electronic piano, it gives you the sound of a softer hammer. In order
to reproduce the sound of a properly voiced hammer, you need to strike harder.
This adds to the perception of a heavier key weight, and this effect cannot be
simulated by changing the volume control. From these discussions, we can
conclude that: there are small differences in the touch weight between grands
and electronics, with the grands tending to be heavier, but those differences
are not sufficient to cause major problems when switching from one to the
other. Thus the fear that practicing on an electronic will make it difficult to
play on a grand is unfounded; in fact, it is more likely to be easier, although
it may take a few minutes of playing on the grand to get used to it.

If you are a beginner purchasing your first piano, an electronic is the obvious
choice, unless you can afford a quality grand and have space for it. Even in
that case, you will probably want an electronic piano also because the cost of
the electronic will be negligible compared to the grand, and it gives you so
many features that the grand does not have. Most acoustic uprights are now
obsolete.

.. _III.17.c:

c. Uprights
^^^^^^^^^^^

Acoustic uprights do have some advantages. They are less expensive than grands.
They take up less space, and for small rooms, large grands may produce too much
sound so that they cannot be played full blast with the lid fully open without
hurting or even damaging the ears. However, the electronics have these same
advantages plus many more. Owners of uprights too often neglect hammer voicing
entirely because this neglect results in more sound. Since uprights are
essentially closed instruments, the neglect of voicing is less noticeable.
Uprights also tend to be less expensive to maintain, mainly because expensive
repairs are not worthwhile and are therefore not performed. Of course, there
are quality uprights that are competitive with grands in feel and sound
quality, but they cost as much as grands.

Among uprights, spinets are the smallest and generally the least expensive
pianos; most do not produce satisfactory sound, even for students. The small
height of spinets limits the string length, which is the main limitation on
sound output. In theory, the treble should produce satisfactory sound (there is
no limitation on string length even for spinets), but most spinets are weak in
the treble because of poor quality of construction; therefore, be sure to test
the higher notes if you are evaluating a spinet – simply compare it with a
larger piano. Console or larger size uprights can be good student pianos. Old
uprights with poor sound are generally not salvageable, no matter what their
size. At such an age, the value of the piano is less than the cost of restoring
them; it is cheaper to buy a newer upright with satisfactory sound. Most
uprights have been “obsoleted” by the electronics. Therefore, there is no
reason to buy a new upright, although some piano teachers and most piano stores
might suggest otherwise. Many piano teachers have not had enough experience
with electronics and are more accustomed to the feel and sound of the acoustic
uprights and tend to recommend acoustics as “real pianos”, which is generally a
mistake. The difficulty of purchasing a quality upright, the problems
frequently encountered with having it properly “prepped” before and after
delivery, and the need to keep it regulated and in tune, are not worth the
slight difference in “tone”, if any.

.. _III.17.d:

d. Grands
^^^^^^^^^

The advantages of most grands are: greater dynamic range (loud/soft), open
structure allowing the sound to escape freely (which provides more control and
expression), richer sound, faster repetition, smoother action (use of gravity
instead of springs), a "true" soft pedal (see :ref:`II.24`), clearer sound
(easier to tune accurately) and more impressive appearance. An exception is the
class of "baby" grands (less than about 5'-2") whose sound output is usually
unsatisfactory and should be considered mainly as decorative furniture. A few
companies (Yamaha, Kawai) are beginning to produce baby grands with acceptable
sound, so for these very new pianos, don't write them off without testing them.
Larger grands can be classified into two main classes, the "student grands"
(those below about 6 to 7 ft), and the concert grands. The concert grands
provide more dynamic range, better sound quality, and more tonal control.

As an example of this "quality versus size" issue, consider the Steinway
pianos. The baby model, model S (5'-2"), is essentially a decorative furniture
and very few produce sufficient quality sound to be considered playable and are
inferior to many uprights. The next larger size group consists of models M, O,
and L (5'-7" to 5'-11"). These models are quite similar and are excellent
student pianos. However, advanced pianists would not consider them to be true
grands because of poorer sustain, too much percussive sound, and notes with too
much harmonic content. The next model, A (6'-2"), is borderline, and B(6'-10"),
C(7'-5"), and D(9') are true grands. One problem with evaluating Steinways is
that the quality within each model is extremely variable; however, on average,
there is a significant improvement in sound quality and output with each
increase in size.

Grands require hammer voicing more frequently than uprights; otherwise, they
become too "brilliant" or "harsh", at which point most owners will end up
playing the grand with the lid closed. Many homeowners ignore voicing entirely.
The result is that such grands produce too much and too harsh sound, and are
therefore played with the lid down. There is nothing technically wrong with
playing a grand with the lid closed. However, some purists will express dismay
at such practice, and you are certainly throwing away something wonderful for
which you made a significant investment. Performances at recitals almost always
require the lid to be open, resulting in a more sensitive piano. Therefore you
should always practice with the lid open before a performance even if you
normally practice with it closed. In a large room, or in a recital hall, there
is much less multiple reflection of the sound so that you do not hear the
deafening roar that can result in a small room. A concert hall will absorb the
sound from the piano so that, if you are accustomed to practicing in a small
room, you will have difficulty hearing your own playing in a concert hall.

One of the biggest advantages of grand pianos is the use of gravity as the
return force of the hammer. In uprights the restoring force for the hammer is
supplied by springs. Gravity is always constant and uniform across the entire
keyboard whereas non-uniformities in the springs and friction can create
non-uniformities in the feel of the keys of an upright. Uniformity of feel is
one of the most important properties of well-regulated, quality pianos. Many
students are intimidated by the appearance of huge grands at recitals and
competitions, but these grands are actually easier to play than uprights. One
fear that these students have concerning these grands is that their actions may
be heavier. However, touch weight is something that is adjusted by the
technician regulating the piano and can be adjusted to any number regardless of
whether the piano is an upright or a grand. Advanced students will of course
find it easier to play demanding pieces on grands than uprights, mainly because
of the faster action and uniformity. Consequently, good grands can save you a
lot of time when you try to acquire advanced skills. The main reason for this
is that it is easy to develop bad habits when struggling with difficult
material on uprights. Challenging material is even more difficult on electronic
pianos (and impossible on models without proper touch weight) because they do
not have the robustness and response to touch that are required at high speeds.

Some people with small rooms agonize over whether a large grand would be too
loud in such a space. Loudness is usually not the most important issue, and you
always have the option of closing the lid to different degrees. The maximum
loudness of the medium and large grands is not that different, and you can play
softer with the larger grands. It is the multiple sound reflections that are
most bothersome. Multiple reflections can be easily eliminated by a carpet on
the floor and sound- insulation on one or two walls. Thus if the piano
physically fits into a room with no obvious difficulties, then it may be
acceptable from the sound point of view.

.. _III.17.e:

e. Purchasing an Acoustic Piano
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Buying an acoustic piano can be a trying experience for the uninitiated,
whether they buy new or used. If a reputable dealer can be found, it is
certainly safer to buy new but even then the cost of the initial depreciation
is large. Many piano stores will rent you the piano with an agreement that the
rental will be applied to the purchase price in case you decide to keep it. In
that case, make sure that you negotiate for the best purchase price before you
even discuss rental; after you agree to a rental, you will have very little
negotiating power. You will end up with a higher initial price so that, even
after subtracting the rental, the final price is not a bargain. Even with
expensive pianos, many dealers find it too costly to keep them prepped and in
tune. At such dealers, it is difficult to test the piano by playing it. Thus
buying an acoustic piano is usually a hit-or-miss proposition and is usually a
stressful and time-consuming experience. For mass produced pianos such as
Yamaha or Kawai, the quality of their new pianos tends to be uniform, so that
you know pretty much what you will get. The sound quality of the more expensive
"hand made" pianos can vary considerably so that buying these pianos is more
difficult if you want to pick a good one.

Good used acoustic pianos are difficult to find in piano stores because
playable pianos sell first and most stores are left with an excess inventory of
unplayable ones. Obviously, the best bargains are to be found among the private
sales. For the uninitiated, you will need to hire a piano tuner/technician to
evaluate the used pianos in the private market. You will also need a lot of
patience because good private sales are not always there when you need them.
However, the wait can be worthwhile because the same piano will cost only half
as much (or less) at a private sale compared to the store. There is a steady
demand for good, reasonably priced pianos. This means that it is not easy to
find bargains at widely accessible sites, such as the internet piano markets,
because good pianos sell quickly. Conversely, such sites are excellent places
to sell, especially if you have a good piano. The best place to find bargains
is the classified section of newspapers at large metropolitan areas. Most such
advertisements are placed on Friday, Saturday, or Sunday.

Only a few name brand pianos "hold their value" when kept for many years. The
rest quickly lose their value so that trying to sell them years after purchase
(new) is not worthwhile. “Hold value” means that their resale value will keep
up with inflation; it does not mean that you can sell them for a profit. Thus
if you bought a piano for $1,000 and sold it 30 years later for $10,000, you
have made no profit if inflation is 10X during those 30 years. In addition, you
will incur the cost of tuning and maintenance of at least $2000 for this
example. It is cheaper to buy a brand new 7 ft Yamaha grand every 30-40 years
than to buy a new Steinway M and completely restore it every 30-40 years;
therefore, the choice of which piano to buy does not depend on economics but on
what type of piano you need. With very few exceptions, pianos are not good
investments; you have to be an experienced piano technician in order to find
bargains in the used piano market that can be resold for a profit. Even if you
find such a bargain, selling pianos is a time consuming, labor-intensive task.
For more details on how to buy a piano, consult Larry Fine's book. Even with
the most famous brands, a newly purchased piano will immediately lose 20% to
30% of its purchase price upon delivery, and will in general depreciate to half
of the price of an equivalent new piano in about 5 years. As a very rough "rule
of thumb" a used piano will cost about half the price of the new one of the
same model in a piano store and almost 1/4 at a private sale.

The price of pianos can be roughly classified according to whether they are
worth rebuilding. Those worth rebuilding tend to cost at least twice as much
when new. Practically all uprights and all mass produced grands (Yamaha, Kawai,
etc), are not rebuilt because the rebuilding cost is about as high as the price
of a new piano of the same model. Rebuilding such pianos is often impossible
because the rebuilding trade and necessary parts are non-existent. Pianos worth
rebuilding are Steinway, Bosendorfer, Bechstein, Mason and Hamlin, some Knabe,
and a few others. Roughly speaking, it costs about 1/4 of the price of a new
piano to rebuild and the resale value is about 1/2 of new; this is why
rebuilding such pianos can be cost effective, for both the rebuilder and the
buyer.

.. _III.17.f:

f. Piano Care
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

All new pianos need at least a year of special care and tuning after purchase,
in order for the strings to stop stretching and the action and hammers to
equilibrate. Most piano dealers will try to minimize the cost of servicing the
new pianos after delivery. This is assuming that the piano was properly prepped
prior to delivery. Many dealers postpone a lot of the prep work until after
delivery, and if the customer does not know about it, may omit some steps
entirely. In this regard, among the less expensive models, Yamaha, Kawai,
Petroff, and a few others may be easier to buy because most of the prep work is
completed at the factory. A new piano will need at least 4 tunings the first
year in order to stabilize the stretching of the strings.

All pianos require maintenance in addition to regular tuning. In general, the
better the quality of the piano, the easier it is to notice the deterioration
caused by normal wear and tear, and therefore the more maintenance it should
receive. That is, more expensive pianos are more expensive to maintain. Typical
maintenance chores are: leveling the keys, reducing friction (such as polishing
the capstans), eliminating extraneous sounds, re-shaping the hammers and
voicing them (needling), checking the innumerable bushings, etc. Voicing the
hammer is probably the most neglected maintenance procedure. Worn, hard,
hammers can cause string breakage, loss of musical control, and difficulty in
playing softly (the last two are bad for technical development). It also ruins
the tonal quality of the piano, making it harsh and unpleasant to the ear. If
the action is sufficiently worn, it may need a general regulation job, which
means restoring all parts of the action to their original specifications.

If the bass wire-wound strings are rusted, this can deaden those notes.
Replacing these strings is worthwhile if those notes are weak and have no
sustain. The upper, non-wound strings generally do not need replacing even if
they appear rusted. However, for extremely old pianos, these strings can be so
stretched out that they have lost all elasticity. Such strings are prone to
breakage and cannot vibrate properly, produce a tinny sound, and should be
replaced.

Pianists should familiarize themselves with some of the basic knowledge about
tuning, such as the parts of a piano, temperaments, stability of tuning, and
effects of temperature and humidity changes, in order to be able to communicate
with the tuner and to understand what s/he needs to do. Too many piano owners
are ignorant of these basics; consequently, they frustrate the tuner and in
fact work against her/im, with the result that the piano is not properly
maintained. Some owners get so accustomed to their deteriorated piano that,
when the tuner does a good job of restoring it to its original glory, the owner
is unhappy about the strange new sound and feel of the piano. Worn hammers tend
to produce overly bright and loud sounds; this has the unexpected effect of
making the action feel light. Therefore, properly voiced hammers may initially
give the impression that the action is now heavier and less responsive. Of
course, the tuner did not change the force required to depress the keys. Once
the owners become accustomed to the newly voiced hammers, they will find that
they have much better control of expression and tone, and they can now play
very softly.

Pianos need to be tuned at least once a year and preferably twice, during the
fall and spring, when the temperature and humidity are midway between their
yearly extremes. Many advanced pianists have them tuned more frequently. In
addition to the obvious advantages of being able to create better music and to
sharpen your musicality, there are many compelling reasons for keeping the
piano tuned. One of the most important is that it can affect your technical
development. Compared to an out-of-tune piano, a well-tuned piano practically
plays itself -- you will find it surprisingly easier to play. Thus a well
maintained piano can accelerate technical development. An out-of-tune piano can
lead to flubs and the stuttering habit of pausing at every mistake. Many
important aspects of expression can be brought out only on well-tuned pianos.
Since we must always pay attention to practicing musically, it does not make
sense to practice on a piano that cannot produce proper music. This is one of
the reasons why I prefer Well Temperaments (with their crystal clear chords) to
the Equal Temperament, in which only the octaves are clear. See Chapter Two for
more discussions on the merits of various temperaments. Higher quality pianos
have a distinct edge because they not only hold the tuning better, but can also
be tuned more accurately. Lower quality pianos often have extraneous beats and
sounds that make accurate tuning impossible.

Those who have absolute pitch (AP) are very much bothered by pianos that are
out of tune. If you have AP, severely out of tune pianos can accelerate the
gradual loss of AP with age. Babies and very young children can automatically
acquire AP if they hear the piano sound sufficiently frequently, even if they
have no idea what AP is. In order for them to acquire the correct AP, the piano
must be in tune.

If you always practice on a tuned piano, you will have a difficult time playing
on one that is out of tune. The music doesn't come out, you make unexpected
mistakes, and have memory blackouts. This holds true even if you know nothing
about tuning and can't even tell if a particular note is out of tune. For a
pianist unfamiliar with tuning, the best way to test the tuning is to play a
piece of music. Good tuning is like magic to any pianist. By playing a piece of
music, most pianists can readily hear the difference between a poor tuning and
an excellent one, even if they cannot tell the difference by playing single
notes or test intervals (assuming they are not also piano tuners). Therefore,
along with technical development, every pianist must learn to hear the benefits
of good tuning. It may be a good idea to play an out-of-tune piano once in a
while in order to know what to expect in case you are asked to perform on one
with questionable tuning. For recitals, it is a good idea to tune the recital
piano just before the recital, so that the recital piano is in better tune than
the practice piano. Try to avoid the reverse case in which the practice piano
is in better tune than the recital piano. This is another reason why students
who practice on inexpensive uprights have little problem with playing recitals
on large, unfamiliar grands, as long as the grands are in tune.

In summary, grands are not necessary for technical development up to about the
intermediate level, although they will be beneficial at any level. Above
intermediate level, the arguments in favor of grands over uprights become
compelling. Grands are better because their actions are faster, they can be
tuned more accurately, have a larger dynamic range, have a true soft pedal, can
enable more control over expression and tone (you can open the lid), and can be
regulated to provide more uniformity from note to note (by use of gravity
instead of springs). These advantages, however, are initially minor compared to
the student's love for music, diligence, and correct practice methods. Grands
become more desirable for advanced students because technically demanding
material is easier to execute on a grand. For such advanced pianists, proper
tuning, regulation, and hammer voicing become essential because if the piano
maintenance is neglected, practically all of the advantages will be lost.
