.. _III.3:

3. Trills & Tremolos 
--------------------

.. _III.3.a:
   
a. Trills
^^^^^^^^^

There is no better demonstration of the effectiveness of the parallel set
(PS) exercises (see :ref:`III.7`) than using them to learn the trill. There are two
major problems to solve in order to trill: 

  #. Speed (with control) 
  #. To continue it as long as desired

The PS exercises were designed to solve exactly these types of problems and
therefore work very well for practicing trills.  Whiteside describes a method
for practicing the trill which is a type of chord attack. Thus use of the chord
attack for practicing the trill is nothing new.  However, because we now
understand the learning mechanism in more detail, we can design the most direct
and effective approach by using PSs.

The first problem to solve is the initial two notes. If the first two notes are
not started properly, learning the trill becomes a difficult task. The
importance of the first two notes applies to runs, arpeggios, etc., also. But
the solution is almost trivial -- apply the two note PS exercise. Therefore,
for a 2323.... trill, use the first 3 as the conjunction and practice 23. Then
practice the 32, then 232, etc. It's that simple! Try it! It works like magic!
You may want to read :ref:`III.7` on PSs before applying them to the trill.

The trill consists of 2 motions: a finger motion and forearm rotation.
Therefore, practice the 2 skills separately. First use only the fingers to
trill, with the hand and arm completely still. Then keep the fingers fixed and
trill only with arm rotation. This way, you will find out if it is the fingers
or arm rotation that is slowing you down. Many students have never practiced
rapid arm rotation (arm rocking), and this will often be the slower motion. For
fast trills, this back-and-forth rotation is invisibly small, but necessary.
Apply the PS exercises to both the finger and arm rotation motions. Exaggerate
the motions for slow trills and increase the speed by reducing the magnitude of
the motions. The final magnitude of both motions need not be the same because
you will use a smaller motion for the slower one (arm rotation) in order to
compensate for its slowness. As you practice these motions, experiment with
different finger positions. See the Tremolo section where similar methods apply
– the trill is just a shrunken tremolo.

Relaxation is even more critical for the trill than almost any other technique
because of the need for rapid momentum balance; that is, the PSs, being only
two notes, there are too many conjunctions for us to rely solely on parallelism
to attain speed. Thus we must be able to change the momenta of the fingers
rapidly. For trills, the momentum of the finger motion must be counteracted by
the arm rotation. Stress will lock the fingers to the larger members such as
palms and hands thus increasing the effective mass of the fingers. Larger mass
means slower motion: witness the fact that the hummingbird can flap its wings
faster than the condor and small insects even faster than the hummingbird. This
is true even if the air resistance were ignored; in fact, the air is
effectively more viscous to the hummingbird than to the condor and for a small
insect, the air is almost as viscous as water is to a big fish; yet insects can
flap their wings rapidly because the wing mass is so small. It is therefore
important to incorporate complete relaxation into the trill from the very
beginning, thus freeing the fingers from the hand. Trilling is one skill that
requires constant maintenance. If you want to be a good triller, you will need
to practice trilling every day. PS Exercise. #1 (2-note) is the best procedure
for keeping the trill in top shape, especially if you had not used it for a
while, or if you want to continue improving it.

Finally, the trill is not a series of staccatos. The fingertips must be at the
bottom of the keydrop as long as possible; i.e., the backchecks must be engaged
for every note. Take careful note of the minimum lift necessary for the
repetition to work. Those who usually practice on grands should be aware that
this lift distance can be almost twice as high for an upright. Faster trills
require smaller lifts; therefore, on an upright, you may have to slow down the
trill. Fast trills on electronic pianos are difficult because their actions are
inferior. 

.. _III.3.b:

b. Tremolos (Beethoven's Pathetique, 1st Movement)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Tremolos are practiced in exactly the same way as trills. Let's apply this to
the sometimes dreaded long octave tremolos of Beethoven's *Pathetique Sonata*
(Opus 13). For some students, these tremolos seem impossible, and many have
injured their hands, some permanently, by over-practicing them. Others have
little difficulty. If you know how to practice them, they are actually quite
simple. The last thing you want to do is to practice this tremolo for hours in
the hopes of building endurance -- that is the surest way to acquire bad habits
and suffer injury.

Since you need the octave tremolos in both hands, we will practice the LH and
alternate with practicing the RH; if the RH catches on faster, you can use it
to teach the LH. I will suggest a sequence of practice methods; if you have any
imagination, you should be able to create your own sequence that may be better
for you -- my suggestion is exactly that: a suggestion for illustration
purposes. For completeness, I have made it too detailed and too long. Depending
on your specific needs and weaknesses, you should be able to shorten the
practice sequence.

In order to practice the ``C2-C3`` tremolo, first, practice the ``C2-C3``
octave (LH).  Bounce the hand up and down, comfortably, repeating the octave,
with emphasis on relaxation -- can you keep playing the octave without fatigue
or stress, especially as you speed it up? If you get tired, find ways of
repeating the octave without developing fatigue by changing your hand position,
motion, etc.  For example, you might gradually raise the wrist and then lower
it again – in this way, you can use 4 wrist positions for each quad. If you
still get tired, stop and change hands; practice the RH ``Ab4-Ab5`` octave that
you will need later on. Once you can play the repetitive octave, 4 times per
beat (include the correct rhythm) without fatigue, try speeding it up. At
maximum speed, you will develop fatigue again, so either slow down or try to
find different ways of playing that reduces fatigue. Change hands as soon as
you feel tired. Do not play loud; one of the tricks for reducing fatigue is to
practice softly. You can add dynamics later, once you have the technique. It is
extremely important to practice softly so that you can concentrate on technique
and relaxation. In the beginning, as you exert yourself to play faster, fatigue
will develop. But when you find the right motions, hand positions, etc., you
will actually feel the fatigue draining out of the hand and you should be able
to rest and even rejuvenate the hand while playing rapidly. You have learned to
relax!

As with the trill, the tremolo consists of finger motion and arm rotation.
First, practice finger tremolo using exaggerated finger motions, playing a very
slow tremolo, lifting fingers as high as you can and lowering them with force
into the keys. Same with arm rotation: fix the fingers and play tremolo using
only arm rotation, in exaggerated way. All up and down motions must be rapid;
to play slowly, simply wait between motions, and practice rapid and complete
relaxation during this wait. Now gradually speed them up; this is accomplished
by reducing the motions. After each is satisfactory, combine them; because both
motions contribute to the tremolo, you need very little of each, which is why
you will be able to play very fast.

You can increase speed even more by adding the PS exercises to both the finger
and arm rotation exercises, or their combination. First the 5,1 PS. Start with
the repeated octaves, then gradually replace each octave with a PS. For
example, if you are playing groups of 4 octaves (``4/4`` time), start by
replacing the 4th octave with a PS, then 4th and 3rd, etc. Soon, you should be
practicing all PSs. If the PSs become uneven or the hand starts to tire, go
back to the octave to relax. Or change hands. Work the PSs until you can play
the 2 notes in the PS almost "infinitely fast" and reproducibly, and
eventually, with good control and complete relaxation. At the fastest PS
speeds, you should have difficulty distinguishing between PSs and octaves. Then
slow down the PSs so that you can play at all speeds with control. Note that in
this case, the 5 note should be slightly louder than the 1. However, you should
practice it both ways: with the beat on the 5 and with it on the 1, so that you
develop a balanced, controllable technique. Now repeat the whole procedure with
the 1,5 PS. Again, although this PS is not required to play this tremolo (only
the previous one is necessary), it is useful for developing a balanced control.
Once both the 5,1 and 1,5 are satisfactory, move on to the 5,1,5 or 5,1,5,1
(played like a short octave trill). If you can do the 5,1,5,1 right away, there
is no need to do the 5,1,5. The objective here is both speed and endurance, so
you should practice speeds that are much faster than the final tremolo speed,
at least for these short tremolos. Then work on the 1,5,1,5.

Once the PSs are satisfactory, start playing groups of 2 tremolos, perhaps with
a momentary pause between groups. Then increase to groups of 3 and then 4
tremolos. The best way to speed up the tremolos is to alternate between
tremolos and octaves. Speed up the octave and try to switch to the tremolo at
this faster speed. Now all you have to do is alternate hands and build up
endurance. Again, building endurance is not so much building muscle, as knowing
how to relax and how to use the correct motions. De-couple the hands from your
body; do not tie the hand-arm-body system into one stiff knot, but let the
hands and fingers operate independently from the body. You should breathe
freely, unaffected by what the fingers are doing. Slow practice with
exaggerated motions is surprisingly effective, so go back to it every time you
run into trouble.

For the RH (``Bb`` octave of bar 149), the 1 should be louder than the 5, but
for both hands, the softer notes should be clearly audible, and their obvious
purpose is to double the speed compared to playing the octaves. Remember to
practice softly; you can play louder whenever you want later, once you have
acquired the technique and endurance. It is important to be able to play
softly, and yet be able to hear every note, at the fastest speeds. Practice
until, at the final speed, you can play the tremolos longer than you need in
the piece. The final LH effect is a constant roar that you can modulate in
loudness up and down. The lower note provides the rhythm and the upper note
doubles the speed. Then practice the ascending tremolos as indicated on the
music.

The Grave that starts this first movement is not easy, although the tempo is
slow, because of its unusual rhythm and the fast runs in bars 4 and 10. The
rhythm of the first bar is not easy because the first note of the second beat
is missing. In order to learn the correct rhythm, use a metronome or supply
single rhythm notes with the LH while practicing the RH. Although the rhythm is
``4/4``, it is easier if you double the notes of the LH and practice it like an
``8/8``. The run in bar 4 is very fast; there are 9 notes in the last group of
``1/128`` notes; therefore, they must be played as triplets, at twice the speed
of the preceding 10 notes. This requires 32 notes per beat, impossible for most
pianists, so you may have to use some rubato; the correct speed may be half the
indicated, according to the original manuscript. The 10th bar contains so many
notes that it spans 2 lines in the Dover edition! Again, the last group of 16
notes at 1/128 speed is played at twice the speed of the preceding 13 notes,
impossibly fast for most pianists. The 4-note chromatic fingering
(:ref:`III.5.h`) may be useful at such speeds. Every student learning this Grave
for the first time must carefully count the notes and beats so as to get a
clear idea of what is involved. These crazy speeds may be an editor’s error.

The first (and 3rd) movement is a variation on the theme in the Grave. That
famous “Dracula” theme was taken from the LH of the first bar; clearly, the LH
carries the emotional content, although the RH carries the melody. Pay
attention to the hard staccato and sf in bars 3 and 4. In bars 7 and 8, the
last notes of the three rising chromatic octaves must be played as ``1/16``,
``1/8``, and ``1/4`` notes, which, combined with the rising pitch and the
cresc., create the dramatic effect. This is true Beethoven, with maximum
contrast: soft-loud, slow-fast, single note-complex chords. In Beethoven’s
manuscript, there is no pedal indication.
