.. _III.15:

15. Origin and Control of Nervousness
-------------------------------------

Nervousness is a natural human emotion like happiness, fear, sadness, etc.
Nervousness arises from a mental perception of a situation in which performance
is critical. Therefore, nervousness, like all emotions, is a performance
enhancing reaction to a situation. Happiness feels good, so we try to create
happy situations, which helps us; fear helps us to escape danger, and sadness
makes us avoid sad situations which tends to improve our chances of survival.
Nervousness makes us concentrate all our energies towards the critical task at
hand and is therefore another survival tool. Most people dislike nervousness
because it is too often accompanied, or is caused, by fear of failure.
Therefore, although nervousness is necessary for a great performance, it needs
to be kept under control; it should not be allowed to interfere with the
performance. The history of the great artists is full of legends of very
nervous as well as totally non-nervous performers, indicating that this
phenomenon has not been studied in any scientific, medical, or psychological
way, with practical results, even at music conservatories where this ought to
be a major component of their curricula.

Emotions are basic, primitive, animal reactions, somewhat like instinct, and
are not totally rational. Under normal circumstances, emotions guide our daily,
moment-by-moment actions nicely. However, under extreme conditions, emotions
can get out of control, and become a liability. Clearly, emotions were designed
to work only under normal circumstances. For example, fear makes the frog
escape long before a predator can catch it. However, when cornered, the frog
freezes in fear and this makes it an easier meal for the snake than if the
overwhelming fear hadn't paralyzed it. Likewise, nervousness normally is mild
and helps us to perform a critical task better than if we were lackadaisical.
However, under extreme conditions, it can spin out of control and hinder our
performance. The requirement to perform a difficult piano solo flawlessly in
front of a large audience eminently qualifies as an extreme situation. It is no
surprise that nervousness can grow out of control, unless our name is Wolfie or
Franz (Freddy apparently didn't qualify, as he was a nervous wreck and disliked
public performances; however, he seemed more comfortable in a salon
environment). Thus, although violinists do get nervous, it does not spin out of
control when they are playing in an orchestra because the conditions are not as
extreme as for solo performances. Youngsters, who are too frightened to perform
solo, almost always enjoy performing in a group. This shows the importance of
the mental perception of the situation.

Clearly, the way to control nervousness is to first study its cause and nature
and to develop methods for controlling it based on this knowledge. Since it is
an emotion, any method for controlling emotions will work. Some have claimed
that, under a doctor's supervision, medications such as Inderal and Atenolol,
or even Zantac will work to calm nerves. Conversely, you can make it worse by
drinking coffee or tea, not getting enough sleep, or taking certain cold
medications. Emotions can also be controlled by use of psychology, training, or
conditioning. Knowledge is the most effective means of control. For example,
experienced snake handlers do not suffer any of the emotions most of us would
experience when we come close to a poisonous snake because of their knowledge
of snakes.

By the time nervousness becomes a problem, it is usually a compound emotion
spinning out of control. In addition to nervousness, other emotions such as
fear and worry, join in. A lack of understanding of nervousness also creates
fear because of the fear of the unknown. Thus the simple knowledge of what
stage fright is, can be a calming factor by reducing the fear of the unknown.

How does nervousness grow out of control, and are there ways to prevent it? One
way to approach this question is to visit some principles of fundamental
science. Practically anything in our universe grows by a process known as the
Nucleation-Growth (NG) mechanism. The NG theory states that an object forms in
two stages, nucleation and growth. This theory became popular and useful
because it is in fact the way in which the majority of objects in our universe
form, from raindrops to cities, stars, humans, etc. Two key elements of NG
theory are nucleation and growth. Nuclei are always forming and disappearing,
but there is a thing called a critical nucleus which, when formed, becomes
stable -- it does not disappear. In general, the critical nucleus does not form
unless there is a supersaturation of the material that aggregate to form it.
For the object to grow to its final size, the critical nucleus needs a growth
mechanism by which to increase its size. In general, the growth mechanism is
totally different from the nucleation mechanism. One interesting aspect of
nucleation is that there is always a barrier to nucleation -- otherwise,
everything would have nucleated a long time ago. Growth is a two-way street:
it can be positive or negative.

Let's examine one example: rain. Rain occurs when water droplets form critical
nuclei in air that is supersaturated with water vapor (relative humidity
greater than 100%). The oft misquoted "scientific truth" that relative humidity
never exceeds 100% is routinely violated by Nature because that "truth" is
valid only under equilibrium conditions, when all forces have been allowed to
equilibrate. Nature is almost always dynamic, and it can be far from
equilibrium. This happens, for example, when the air cools rapidly and becomes
supersaturated with water vapor; that is, relative humidity higher than 100%.
Even without supersaturation, water vapor is constantly forming water droplets,
but these evaporate before they can form critical nuclei. With supersaturation,
critical nuclei can suddenly form, especially if there are hydrophilic dust
particles (the seeds) in the air or compressive disturbances such as
thunderclaps that bring the molecules closer together, thus increasing the
supersaturation. The air filled with critical nuclei is what we call a cloud or
fog. If the formation of the cloud reduces the supersaturation to zero, a
stable cloud is created; if not, the nuclei will keep growing to reduce the
supersaturation. Nuclei can grow by other mechanisms. This is the growth stage
of the NG process. The nuclei can bump into each other and aggregate, or start
to fall and hit other water molecules and nuclei, until rain drops form.

Let's apply NG theory to nervousness. In everyday life, your sense of
nervousness comes and goes, without becoming anything serious. However, in an
unusual situation such as a performance, there is a supersaturation of factors
that cause nervousness: you must perform flawlessly, you didn't have enough
time to practice the piece, there is a big audience out there, etc. However,
this still may not cause any problem because there are natural barriers to
nucleating nervousness, such as a flow of adrenalin, a sense of accomplishment,
or even being unaware of nervousness, or you might be too busy finalizing the
preparations for the recital. But then, a fellow performer says, "Hey, I got
butterflies in my stomach," and you suddenly feel a lump in your throat and
realize that you are nervous -- the critical nucleus has formed! This may still
not be that bad, until you start to worry that perhaps your piece is not yet
ready to perform or the nervousness might interfere with the playing -- these
worries cause the nervousness to grow. These are exactly the processes
described by NG theory. The nice thing about any scientific theory is that it
not only describes the process in detail, but also provides solutions. So how
does NG theory help us?

We can attack nervousness at the nucleation stage; if we can prevent
nucleation, it will never form a critical nucleus. Merely delaying the
nucleation will be helpful because that will reduce the time available for it
to grow. Playing easier pieces will reduce the supersaturation of worry. Mock
recitals will give you more experience and confidence; both will reduce the
fear of the unknown. Generally, you need to perform a piece 3 or more times
before you know whether you can perform it successfully or not; thus performing
pieces that had been performed several times will also help. Nervousness is
generally worst before a performance; once you start playing, you are so busy
with the task at hand that there is no time to dwell on nervousness, thus
reducing the growth factor. This knowledge helps because it alleviates the fear
that things might get worse during the performance. Not dwelling on nervousness
is another way of delaying the nucleation as well as slowing the growth stage.
Thus it is a good idea to keep yourself occupied while waiting for the recital
to begin. MP is useful because you can check your memory and keep yourself
occupied at the same time; thus it is the most important tool for preventing or
delaying nucleation and for reducing growth. See sections 16.c & d for
suggestions on how teachers can provide performance training.

For an important recital, avoiding nucleation is probably not possible.
Therefore we should examine ways to discourage growth. Since nervousness
generally decreases after the performance starts, this knowledge can be used to
reduce the worry and therefore the nervousness. This can feed on itself, and as
nervousness begins to decrease, you feel more assured, and it can often
dissipate entirely, if you can reduce it below the critical nucleus. Another
important factor is mental attitude and preparation. A performance is always an
interactive process between you and the audience. Playing musically, of course,
is always the answer -- when you can involve your entire brain in the business
of creating music, there is little brain resources left to worry about
nervousness. These are all measures for reducing the growth.

It is not a good idea to pretend that nervousness does not exist, especially
with youngsters who can more easily suffer long term psychological damage. Kids
are smart and they can easily see through the pretense, and the need to play
along with the pretense can only increase the stress. This is why performance
training, in which nervousness is discussed openly, is so important. For young
students, the parents and friends attending the recital need to be educated
also. Statements like "I hope you aren't nervous!" or "How can you perform
without getting nervous?" are almost certain to cause nucleation and growth. On
the other hand, to completely ignore nervousness and send kids out to perform
with no performance training is irresponsible and can even cause serious,
lifelong psychological damage.

Developing the proper mental attitude is the best way for controlling stage
fright. If you can get into the frame of mind that performing is a wonderful
experience of making music for others and develop proper reactions when you do
make mistakes, nervousness will not be problematic. There is this huge
difference between creating humor out of a mistake or recovering nicely from it
or letting that mistake look like a disaster that mars the entire performance.
Performance training must include lessons on how to react to various
circumstances. It is important, early in a student's career, to play easy
pieces that can be performed without nervousness, Eeven one such experience can
provide the existence proof that performing without nervousness is possible.
That single experience can influence your performance attitude for the rest of
your life. The best way to guarantee such a flawless performance is to develop
a secure MP, which will allow you to start playing from any note in the piece,
stay mentally ahead of the music, create musicality in your mind, recover from
flubs, avoid them or cover them up, keep your mind occupied (thus preventing
nervousness from developing), practice any part of the music at any time or
place, write out the entire score from memory (one hand at a time!), etc.;
these achievements will give you the confidence of an accomplished musician.
The audience will conclude that they are being treated to great, rare talent.

In summary, stage fright is nervousness that has spiraled out of control. A
certain amount of nervousness is normal and helpful. You can minimize
nervousness by delaying its nucleation by keeping busy and reducing its growth
by playing musically; MP is the most effective tool for this purpose. Thus it
doesn't make sense, and is a mistake, to ask "do you get nervous when you
perform?" Everyone does, and should. We only need to contain nervousness so
that it does not grow out of control. Realizing that a certain amount of
nervousness is normal is the best starting point for learning to control it. Of
course, there is a wide range of individuals from those who don't get nervous
at all, to those who suffer terribly from stage fright. The best policy for
nervousness is honesty -- we must acknowledge its effect on each individual and
treat it accordingly. Gaining confidence in your ability to perform can usually
eliminate nervousness and perfecting the art of MP is the best way to achieve
such confidence.
