.. _III.13:

13. Video Recording and Audio Recording Your Own Playing
--------------------------------------------------------

One of the best ways to improve musical playing and to practice for recitals is
to videotape or record it and watch/listen to it. You will be surprised at how
good and how bad the different parts of your playing are. They are often very
different from what you imagine yourself to be doing: good touch? rhythm? tempo
accurate and constant? What motions are breaking up the rhythm? Do you clearly
bring out the melodic lines? Is one hand too loud/soft? Are the
arm/hands/fingers in their optimum positions? Are you using the whole body --
i.e., is the body in synch with the hands or are they fighting each other? All
these and much more become immediately obvious. The same music sounds quite
different when you are playing it or listening to its recording. You hear much
more when listening to a recording than when playing it. Video recording is the
best way to prepare for recitals and can sometimes eliminate nervousness
because you have a clearer picture of your performance.

Initially, most pianists made only audio recordings, thinking that the musical
output was the most important; in addition, the older camcorders could not
adequately record music. Audio recording has the disadvantage that proper
recording of the piano sound is more difficult than most people realize and
such attempts often result in failure and abandonment of the effort. Camcorders
have become so affordable and versatile that videotaping is now unquestionably
the better method. Although the resulting sound may not be CD quality (don't
believe the claims of digital video camera manufacturers), you do not need such
quality to achieve all the useful pedagogical objectives. Make sure to select a
camcorder with the option of turning the automatic gain control off in audio;
otherwise, the pianissimo passages will be amplified and distorted. Many sales
persons in camcorder dealers are unfamiliar with this feature because it is
usually an option in the software settings. You will also need a fairly sturdy
tripod; a light one might shake if you really pound away at the piano. Only
concert pianists need more advanced audio recording systems; for the best and
cost effective results, seek out a recording studio. You may need high quality
audio recording for various uses; the audio recording technology is changing so
rapidly that it is best to surf the internet for the latest equipment and
methods and will not be further discussed here.

Start by making a one-to-one map between what you think you are playing and the
actual output (video or audio). That way, you can modify your general playing
tendencies so that the output will come out right. For example, if you are
playing faster than you think in easy sections and slower in difficult
sections, you can make the proper adjustments. Are the pauses long enough? Are
the endings convincing?

The recording session will reveal how you react in an actual performance, for
example, if you make a mistake or have a blackout. Do you react negatively to
mistakes and become discouraged, or can you recover and concentrate on the
music? During a performance, you tend to get blackouts, etc., at unexpected
places where you generally had no trouble during practice. Recording sessions
can flush out most of those problem spots. Pieces are not "finished" unless you
can record them satisfactorily. Videotaping is a good simulation of playing in
recitals. Thus, if you can play satisfactorily during videotaping, you should
have little trouble playing that piece in a recital. Once you start taping, you
may want to send the tapes to other people!

What are the disadvantages? The main disadvantage is that it will take a lot of
time, because you must watch and listen to the recordings. You might be able to
save some time by listening while you are doing some other chore. The recording
session itself takes little extra time because that counts as part of practice
time. However, every time you correct a section, you must re-record and listen
again. Thus there is no escaping the fact that watching/listening to yourself
is going to be a time consuming operation. However, it is something that every
piano student must do. One problem with camcorders is that they all have motors
that make noise which is picked up by the built-in mic. If you find this to be
a problem, find a model with either an attachable mic of good quality, or a
mic input and buy a separate quality mic, such as a boundary or PZM mic.
