.. _III.1:

1. Tone, Rhythm, Legato, Staccato
---------------------------------

.. _III.1.a:

a. What is "Good Tone"?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**The Basic Keystroke**: The basic keystroke must be learned by every pianist.
Without it, nothing else will make a meaningful difference – you can’t build a
Taj Mahal out of mud-bricks and straw. The keystroke consists of 3 main
components, the downstroke, the hold, and the lift. This might sound like a
trivially simple thing to learn, but it is not, and most piano teachers
struggle to teach their students the correct keystroke. The difficulties arise
mostly because the mechanics of the keystroke have not been adequately
explained anywhere; therefore, those explanations will be the major topics of
these paragraphs.

The downstroke is what creates the piano sound initially; in the correct
motion, it must be as quick as possible, yet with control of the volume. This
control is not easy because we found out in the gravity drop section that
faster downstroke generally means louder sound. The quickness gives the note
its precise timing; without this quickness, the timing of the note start
becomes a sloppy affair. Therefore, whether the music is slow or fast, the
downstroke must be basically fast. These requirements of fast stroke, control
of volume, and many others we will shortly encounter, bring us to a most
important principle of learning piano – finger sensitivity. The finger must be
able to sense and execute many requirements before you can master the basic
keystroke. In order to control volume, the downstroke should consist of 2
parts; an initial strong component to break the friction/inertia of the key and
start its motion, and a second component with the appropriate strength for the
desired volume. The suggestion to “play deeply into the keys” is a good one in
the sense that the downstroke must not slow down; it must accelerate as you
reach the bottom so that you never lose control over the hammer.

This 2-part motion is especially important when playing pianissimo. In a well
regulated concert grand, friction is nearly zero and the inertia of the system
is low. In all other pianos (which comprises 99% of all pianos) there is
friction that must be overcome, especially when you first start the downstroke
(friction is highest when the motion is zero), and there are numerous
imbalances in the system that produce inertia. Assuming that the piano is
properly voiced, you can play very soft pianissimo by first breaking the
friction/inertia and then making the soft stroke. These 2 components must join
seamlessly so that to an observer, it looks like a single motion, with the
flesh of the fingers acting like shock absorbers. The required fast downstroke
means that the finger muscle must have a high proportion of fast muscles (see
:ref:`III.7.a`). This is achieved by fast motion practice over extended
periods of time (about a year) and avoiding strength exercises; therefore, the
statement that piano technique requires finger strength is absolutely wrong. We
need to cultivate finger speed and sensitivity.

The hold component of the keystroke is necessary to hold the hammer using the
backcheck and to accurately control the note duration. Without the hold, the
hammer can flop around, producing extraneous sounds, cause problems with
repeated notes, trills, etc. Beginners will have difficulty with making a
smooth transition between the downstroke and hold. Do not push down on the key
during the hold in an attempt to “push deeply into the piano”; gravity is
sufficient to hold the key down. The length of the hold is what controls color
and expression; therefore it is an important part of the music.

The lift causes the damper to fall onto the strings and terminate the sound.
Together with the hold, it determines the note duration. Similarly to the
downstroke, the lift must be fast in order to control the note duration
accurately. Therefore, the pianist must make a conscious effort to grow fast
muscles in the extensor muscles, just as we did with the flexor muscles for the
downstroke. Especially when playing fast, many students will forget about the
lift entirely, resulting in sloppy play. A run may end up consisting of
staccato, legato, and overlapping notes. Fast parallel sets may end up sounding
as if they were being played with the pedal.

By controlling all 3 components of the basic key stroke accurately, you
maintain complete control over the piano; specifically, over the hammer and the
damper, and this control is needed for authoritative play. These components
determine the nature of each note. You can now see why a fast downstroke and
equally fast lift is so important, especially during slow play. In normal play,
the lift of the previous note coincides with the downstroke of the following
note. In staccato and legato (:ref:`III.1.c`) and fast play (:ref:`III.7.i`),
we need to modify all these components, and they will be discussed separately.
If you had never practiced these components before, start practice with all 5
fingers, ``C`` to ``G``, as you do when playing a scale and apply the
components to each finger, HS. If you want to exercise the extensor muscles,
you can exaggerate the quick lift stroke. Try to keep all the non-playing
fingers on the keys, lightly. As you try to speed up the down and lift strokes,
playing about one note per second, you may start to build stress; in that case,
practice until you can eliminate the stress. The most important thing to
remember about the hold component is that you must instantly relax during the
hold after the quick downstroke. In other words, you need to practice both
stroke speed and relaxation speed. Then gradually speed up the play; there is
no need to play fast at this time. Just get up to some comfortable speed. Now
do the same with any slow music you can play, such as the 1st movement of
Beethoven’s *Moonlight*, HS. If you had never done this before, HT will be
initially very awkward because you now need to coordinate so many components in
both hands.  However, with practice, the music will come out better, you will
gain much more control over the expression, and should get the feeling that you
can now play more musically. There should be no missed or wrong notes, all the
notes should be more even, and you can execute all the expression marks with
greater precision. The performances will be consistent from day to day, and
technique will progress more rapidly. Without a good basic keystroke, you can
get into trouble when you play different pianos, or pianos that are not in good
regulation, and the music can often come out worse as you practice more because
you can acquire bad habits such as inaccurate timing. Of course, the whole
process described in this one paragraph may take weeks or even months to
complete.

**Tone: Single versus Multiple Notes, Pianissimo, Fortissimo.** Tone is the quality
of the sound; whether the sum total of all the properties of the sound is
appropriate for the music. There is controversy over whether a pianist can
control the "tone" of a single note on the piano. If you were to sit at the
piano and play one note, it seems nearly impossible to alter the tone except
for things like staccato, legato, loud, soft, etc. On the other hand, there is
no question that different pianists produce differing tones. Two pianists can
play the same composition on the same piano and produce music with very
different tonal quality. Most of this apparent contradiction can be resolved by
carefully defining what "tone" means. For example, a large part of the tonal
differences among pianists can be attributed to the particular pianos they use,
and the way those pianos are regulated or tuned. Controlling the tone of a
single note is probably just one aspect of a multi-faceted, complex issue.
Therefore, the most important distinction we must make initially is whether we
are talking about a single note or a group of notes. Most of the time, when we
hear different tones, we are listening to a group of notes. In that case, tone
differences are easier to explain. Tone is mostly produced by the control of
the notes relative to each other. This almost always comes down to precision,
control and musical content. Therefore, tone is mainly a property of a group of
notes and depends on the musical sensitivity of the pianist.

However, it is also clear that we can control the tone of a single note in
several ways. We can control it by use of the soft and damper pedals. We can
also change the harmonic content (the number of overtones) by playing louder or
softer. The soft pedal changes the tone, or timbre, by reducing the prompt
sound relative to the after-sound. When a string is struck with a greater
force, more harmonics are generated. Thus when we play softly, we produce sound
containing stronger fundamentals. However, below a certain loudness, there is
insufficient energy to excite the fundamental and you mostly excite some higher
frequency traveling waves, somewhat similar to the flautando in the violin (the
inertia of the piano string acts like the finger in the flautando). Therefore,
somewhere between PP and FF, there is an optimum strike force that maximizes
the fundamental. The damper pedal also changes the timbre by allowing
vibrations at the non-struck strings.

The tone or timbre can be controlled by the tuner by voicing the hammer or by
tuning differently. A harder hammer produces a more brilliant tone (larger
harmonic content) and a hammer with a flat striking area produces a harsher
tone (more high frequency harmonics). The tuner can change the stretch or
control the amount of detuning among the unisons. Up to a point, larger stretch
tends to produce brighter music and insufficient stretch can produce a piano
with unexciting sound. When detuned within the sympathetic vibration frequency
range, all strings of a note will be in perfect tune (vibrate at the same
frequency), but will interact differently with each other. For example, the
note can be made to "sing" which is an after-sound whose volume wavers. No two
strings are ever identical, so that the option of tuning identically simply
does not exist.

Finally, we come to the difficult question: can you vary the tone of a single
note by controlling the downstroke? Most of the arguments over tone control
center on the free flight property of the hammer before it strikes the strings.
Opponents (of single note tone control) argue that, because the hammer is in
free flight, only its velocity matters and therefore tone is not controllable
for a note played at a specified loudness. But the assumption of free flight
has never been proven, as we shall now see. One factor affecting tone is the
flex of the hammer shank. For a loud note, the shank may be significantly
flexed as the hammer is launched into free flight. In that case, the hammer can
have a larger effective mass than its original mass when it hits the strings.
This is because the force, F, of the hammer on the strings, is given by F = -Ma
where M is the mass of the hammer and a is its deceleration upon impact with
the strings. Positive flex adds an extra force because, as the flex recovers
after the jack is released, it pushes the hammer forwards; when F increases, it
doesn't matter if M or a increases, the effect is the same. However, a is more
difficult to measure than M (for example you can easily simulate a larger M by
using a heavier hammer) so we usually say, in this case, that the "effective
mass" has increased, to make it easier to visualize the effect of the larger F
on how the strings respond. In reality, however, positive flex increases a. For
a note played staccato, the flex may be negative by the time the hammer strikes
the strings, so that the tone difference between "deep" playing and staccato
may be considerable. These changes in effective mass will certainly change the
distribution of overtones and affect the tone we hear. Since the shank is not
100% rigid, we know that there is always a finite flex. The only question is
whether it is sufficient to affect tone as we hear it. It almost certainly is
because the hammer shank is a relatively flexible piece of wood. If this is
true, then the tone of the lower notes, with the heavier hammers, should be
more controllable because the heavier hammers will cause a larger flex.
Although one might expect the flex to be negligible because the hammer is so
light, the knuckle is very close to the hammer flange bushing, creating a
tremendous leverage. The argument that the hammer is too light to induce flex
is not valid because the hammer is sufficiently massive to hold all of the
kinetic energy required to make even the loudest sounds. That is a lot of
energy!

Note that the hammer let-off is only several millimeters and this distance is
extremely critical for tone. Such a small let-off suggests that the hammer is
designed to be in acceleration when it hits the string. The hammer is not in
free flight after the jack releases because for the first few millimeters after
release the hammer is being accelerated by the recovery of the shank flex. The
let-off is the smallest controllable distance that can maintain the
acceleration without any chance of locking the hammer onto the strings because
the jack could not release. This flex explains four otherwise mysterious facts:

  #. The tremendous energy that such a light hammer can transfer to the strings
  #. The decrease in tone quality (or control) when the let-off is too large
  #. The critical dependence of the sound output and tone control on hammer 
     weight and size
  #. The clicking sound that the piano makes when the hammer shank bushing 
     deteriorates (a classic example is the clicking Teflon bushing)

The clicking is the sound of the bushing snapping back when the jack releases
and the shank flex takes over -- without the flex unwinding, there is no force
to snap the busing back; therefore, without flex, there will be no click. Since
the clicking can be heard even for moderately soft sounds, the shank is flexed
for all except the softest sounds.

This scenario also has important implications for the pianist (not only for the
piano tuner). It means that the tone of a single note can be controlled. It also
tells us how to control it. First of all, for PPP sounds, there is negligible
flex and we are dealing with a different tone from louder sounds.  Pianists know
that, to play PP, you press down with a constant velocity - note that this
minimizes flex because there is no acceleration at release. When playing
pianissimo, you want to minimize flex in order to minimize the effective mass of
the hammer. Secondly, for maximum flex, the downstroke should accelerate at the
bottom. This makes a lot of sense: "deep tone" is produced by leaning into the
piano and pressing firmly, even with soft sounds. That is exactly how you
maximize flex, which is equivalent to using a larger hammer. This information is
also critical for the piano technician. It means that the optimum hammer size is
one which is sufficiently small so that flex is zero somewhere around PP, but
sufficiently large so that flex is significant starting around mf. This is a
very clever mechanical arrangement that allows the use of relatively small
hammers that enable rapid repetitions and can still transmit a maximum amount of
energy to the strings. It means that it is a mistake to go to larger hammers to
produce more sound because you will lose repetition speed and tone control. The
existence of hammer shank flex is now well known (“Five Lectures on the
Acoustics of the Piano”).

Can the difference in tone of a single note be heard on the piano by playing
only one note? Usually not; most people are not sensitive enough to hear this
difference with most pianos. You will need a Steinway B or better piano, and you
may start to hear this difference (if you test this with several pianos of
progressively higher quality) with the lower notes. However, when actual music
is played, the human ear is amazingly sensitive to how the hammer impacts the
strings, and the difference in tone can be easily heard. This is similar to
tuning: most people (including most pianists) will be hard pressed to hear the
difference between a super tuning and an ordinary tuning by playing single notes
or even testing intervals. However, practically any pianist can hear the
difference in tuning quality by playing a piece of their favorite music. You can
demonstrate this yourself. Play an easy piece twice, in an identical way except
for touch. First, play with arm weight and "pressing deeply" into the piano,
making sure that the key drop accelerates all the way down (correct basic
keystroke). Then compare this to the music when you press shallowly so that
there is complete key drop, but there is no acceleration at the bottom. You may
need to practice a little to make sure that the first time is not louder than
the second. You should hear an inferior tone quality for the second mode of
play. In the hands of great pianists, this difference can be quite large. Of
course, we discussed above that tone is controlled most strongly by how you play
successive notes, so that playing music to test the effect of single notes is
clearly not the best way. However, it is the most sensitive test.

**Pianissimo**: We saw that for PPP, you need an accurate basic key stroke, and
rapid relaxation. Feeling the keys with the pads of the fingers is important. In
general, you should always practice with a soft touch until the passage is
mastered, then add mf or FF or whatever is needed, because playing with a soft
touch is the most difficult skill to develop. There is no acceleration of the
downstroke and no hammer shank flex, but the backcheck must be controlled (key
down and held). The most important factors for PPP are proper regulation
(especially minimum let-off, hammer voicing, and correct hammer weight). Trying
to cultivate PPP technique without proper piano maintenance is futile. In an
emergency (during a performance with unsatisfactory piano) you might try the
soft pedal with an upright or a very slight partial soft pedal with a grand. PPP
is difficult on most digitals because the key action is inferior and
deteriorates quickly after about 5 years of use. But an acoustic that was not
maintained can be much worse.

**Fortissimo** is a matter of transferring weight into the piano. This means
body leaning forward so that the center of gravity is closer to the keyboard and
playing from the shoulders. Do not use only hands or arms for FF. Again,
relaxation is important so that you do not waste energy, you enable maximum
downstroke speed, and the proper force can be directed only where it is needed.
For a passage to be played FF, practice without the FF until the passage is
mastered, then add FF.

In summary, tone is primarily a result of uniformity and control of playing and
depends on the musical sensitivity of the player. Tone control is a complex
issue involving every factor that changes the nature of the sound and we have
seen that there are many ways to change the piano sound. It all starts with how
the piano is regulated. Each pianist can control the tone by numerous means,
such as by playing loudly or softly, or by varying the speed. For example, by
playing louder and faster, we can produce music consisting mainly of the prompt
sound; conversely, a slower and softer play will produce a subdued effect, using
more after-sound. And there are innumerable ways in which to incorporate the
pedal into your playing. We saw that the tone of a single note can be controlled
because the hammer shank has flex. The large number of variables ensures that
every pianist will produce a different tone.

.. _III.1.b:

b. What is Rhythm? (Beethoven’s Tempest, Op. 31, #2, Appassionata, Op. 57)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Rhythm is the (repetitive) timing framework of music. When you read about rhythm
(see Whiteside), it often seems like a mysterious aspect of music that only
"inborn talent" can express. Or perhaps you need to practice it all your life,
like drummers. Most frequently, however, correct rhythm is simply a matter of
accurate counting, of correctly reading the music, especially the time
signatures. This is not as easy as it sounds; difficulties often arise because
most indications for rhythm are not explicitly spelled out everywhere on the
music score since it is part of things like the time signature that appears only
once at the beginning (there are too many such "things" to be listed here, such
as the difference between a waltz and a mazurka. Another example: without
looking at the music, some would think that the beat in the *Happy Birthday*
song is on “happy”, but it is actually on “birth”; this song is a waltz). In
many instances, the music is created mainly by manipulating these rhythmic
variations so that rhythm is one of the most important elements of music. In
short, most rhythmic difficulties arise from not reading the music correctly.
This often happens when you try to read the music HT; there is too much
information for the brain to process and it can't be bothered with rhythm,
especially if the music involves new technical skills. That initial reading
mistake then becomes incorporated into the final music from repeated practice.

**Definition of Rhythm**: Rhythm consists of 2 parts: timing and accents, and
they come in 2 forms, formal and logical. The mysteries surrounding rhythm and
the difficulties encountered in defining rhythm arise from the "logical" part,
which is at once the key element and the most elusive. So let's tackle the
simpler formal rhythms first. They are simpler but they aren't less important;
too many students make mistakes with these elements which can render the music
unrecognizable.

**Formal Timing**: The formal timing rhythm is given by the time signature, and
is indicated at the very beginning of the music score. The major time signatures
are waltz (``3/4``), common time (``4/4``), "cut time" (``2/2``, also alla
breve), and ``2/4``.  The waltz has 3 beats per bar (measure), etc.; the number
of beats per bar is indicated by the numerator. ``4/4`` is the most common and
is often not even indicated, although it should be indicated by a "C" at the
beginning (you can remember it as "C stands for common"). Cut time is indicated
by the same "C", but with a vertical line down the center (cuts the "C" in
half). The reference note is indicated by the denominator, so that the ``3/4``
waltz has 3 quarter-notes per bar, and ``2/4`` is, in principle, twice as fast
as ``2/2`` cut time. The meter is the number of beats in a measure, and almost
every meter is constructed from duples or triples, although exceptions have been
used for special effects (5, 7, or 9 beats).

**Formal Accents**: Each time signature has its own formal accent (louder or
softer beats). If we use the convention that 1 is the loudest, 2 is softer,
etc., then the (Viennese) waltz has the formal accent 133 (the famous
oom-pha-pha); the first beat gets the accent; the Mazurka can be 313 or 331.
Common time has the formal accent 1323, and cut time and ``2/4`` have the accent
1212. A syncopation is a rhythm in which the accent is placed at a location
different from the formal accent; for example a syncopated ``4/4`` might be 2313
or 2331. Note that the 2331 rhythm is fixed throughout the composition, but the
1 is at an unconventional location.

**Logical Timing and Accents**: This is where the composer injects his music. It
is a change in timing and loudness from the formal rhythm. Although rhythmic
logic is not necessary, it is almost always there. Common examples of timing
rhythmic logic are accel. (to make things more exciting), decel. (perhaps to
indicate an ending) or rubato. Examples of dynamic rhythmic logic are increasing
or decreasing loudness, forte, PP, etc.

Beethoven's *Tempest Sonata* (Op. 31, #2), illustrates the formal and logical
rhythms. For example, in the 3rd movement, the first 3 bars are 3 repetitions of
the same structure, and they simply follow the formal rhythm. However, in bars
43-46, there are 6 repetitions of the same structure in the RH, but they must be
squeezed into 4 formal rhythmic bars! If you make 6 identical repetitions in the
RH, you are wrong! In addition, in bar 47, there is an unexpected "sf" that has
nothing to do with the formal rhythm, but is an absolutely essential logical
rhythm.

If rhythm is so important, what guidance can one use, in order to cultivate it?
Obviously, you must treat rhythm as a separate subject of practice for which you
need a specific program of attack. Therefore, during the initial learning of a
new piece, set aside some time for working on the rhythm. A metronome,
especially one with advanced features, can be helpful here. First, you must
double check that your rhythm is consistent with the time signature. This can't
be done in your mind even after you can play the piece -- you must revisit the
sheet music and check every note. Too many students play a piece a certain way
"because it sounds right"; you can't do that. You must check with the score to
see if the correct notes carry the correct accent strictly according to the time
signature. Only then, can you decide which rhythmic interpretation is the best
way to play and where the composer has inserted violations of the basic rules
(very rare); more often the rhythm indicated by the time signature is strictly
correct but sounds counter-intuitive. An example of this is the mysterious
"arpeggio" at the beginning of Beethoven's *Appassionata* (Op. 57). A normal
arpeggio (such as ``C E G``) would start with the first note (``C``), which
should carry the accent (downbeat). However, Beethoven starts each bar at the
third note of the arpeggio (the first bar is incomplete and carries the first
two notes of the "arpeggio"); this forces you to accent the third note (``G``),
not the first note, if you follow the time signature correctly. We find out the
reason for this odd "arpeggio" when the main theme is introduced in bar 35. Note
that this "arpeggio" is an inverted, schematized (simplified) form of the main
theme.  Beethoven had psychologically prepared us for the main theme by giving
us only its rhythm! This is why he repeats it, after raising it by a curious
interval -- he wanted to make sure that we recognized the unusual rhythm (he
used the same device at the beginning of his 5th symphony, where he repeated the
4-note motif at a lower pitch). Another example is Chopin's
*Fantaisie-Impromptu*. The first note of the RH (bar 5) must be softer than the
second. Can you find at least one reason why? Although this piece is in double
time, it may be instructive to practice the RH as ``4/4`` to make sure that the
wrong notes are not emphasized.

Check the rhythm carefully when you start HS. Then check again when you start
HT. When the rhythm is wrong, the music usually becomes impossible to play at
speed. Thus, if you have unusual difficulty in getting up to speed, it is a good
idea to check the rhythm. In fact, incorrect rhythmic interpretation is one of
the most common causes of speed walls and why you have trouble HT. When you make
an rhythmic error, no amount of practice will enable you to get up to speed!
This is one of the reasons why outlining works: it can simplify the job of
correctly reading the rhythm. Therefore, when outlining, concentrate on rhythm.
Also, when you first start HT, you may have more success by exaggerating the
rhythm. Rhythm is another reason why you should not attempt pieces that are too
difficult for you. If you don't have sufficient technique, you will not be able
to control the rhythm. What can happen is that the lack of technique will impose
an incorrect rhythm into your playing, thus creating a speed wall.

Next, look for the special rhythmic markings, such as "sf" or accent marks.
Finally, there are situations in which there are no indications on the music and
you simply have to know what to do, or listen to a recording in order to pick up
special rhythmic variations. Therefore, as part of the practice routine, you
should experiment with rhythm, accenting unexpected notes, etc., to see what
might happen.

Rhythm is also intimately associated with speed. This is why you need to play
most Beethoven compositions above certain speeds; otherwise, the emotions
associated with the rhythm and even the melodic lines can be lost. Beethoven was
a master of rhythm; thus you cannot play Beethoven successfully without paying
special attention to rhythm. He usually gives you at least two things
simultaneously: 

  #. An easy-to-follow melody that the audience hears
  #. A rhythmic/harmonic device that controls what the audience feels

Thus in the first movement of his *Pathetique* (Op. 13), the agitated LH tremolo
controls the emotions while the audience is preoccupied with listening to the
curious RH.  Therefore a mere technical ability to handle the fast LH tremolo is
insufficient -- you must be able to control the emotional content with this
tremolo. Once you understand and can execute the rhythmic concept, it becomes
much easier to bring out the musical content of the entire movement, and the
stark contrast with the Grave section becomes obvious.

There is one class of rhythmic difficulties that can be solved using a simple
trick. This is the class of complex rhythms with missing notes. A good example
of this can be found in the 2nd movement of Beethoven's Pathetique. The ``2/4``
time signature is easy to play in bars 17 to 21 because of the repeated chords
of the LH that maintain the rhythm. However, in bar 22, the most important
accented notes of the LH are missing, making it difficult to pick up the
somewhat complex play in the RH. The solution to this problem is to simply fill
in the missing notes of the LH! In this way, you can easily practice the correct
rhythm in the RH.

In summary, the "secret" of great rhythm is no secret -- it must start with
correct counting (which, I must re-emphasize, is not easy). For advanced
pianists, it is of course much more; it is magic. It is what distinguishes the
great from the ordinary. It is not just counting the accents in each bar but how
the bars connect to create the developing musical idea – the logical component
of rhythm. For example, in Beethoven's *Moonlight* (Op. 27), the beginning of the
3rd movement is basically the 1st movement played at a crazy speed. This
knowledge tells us how to play the 1st movement, because it means that the
series of triplets in the 1st movement must be connected in such a way that they
lead to the culmination with the three repeated notes. If you simply played the
repeated notes independently of the preceding triplets, all these notes will
lose their meaning/impact. Rhythm is also that odd or unexpected accent that our
brains somehow recognize as special. Clearly, rhythm is a critical element of
music to which we must pay special attention.

.. _III.1.c:

c. Legato, Staccato
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Legato is smooth play. This is accomplished by connecting successive notes – do
not lift the first note until the second one is played. Fraser recommends
considerable overlap of the two notes. The first moments of a note contain a lot
of “noise” so that overlapping notes are not that noticeable. Because legato is
a habit that you must build into your playing, experiment with different amounts
of overlap to see how much overlap gives the best legato for you. Then practice
this until it becomes a habit so that you can always reproduce the same effect.
Chopin considered legato as the most important skill to develop for a beginner.
Chopin’s music requires special types of legato and staccato (*Ballade Op. 23*),
so it is important to pay attention to these elements when playing his music. If
you want to practice legato, play some Chopin. The basic keystroke is absolutely
necessary for legato.

In staccato, the finger is bounced off the key so as to produce a brief sound
with no sustain. It is somewhat astonishing that most books on learning piano
discuss staccato, but never define what it is! The backcheck is not engaged for
staccato and the damper cuts off the sound immediately after the note is played.
Therefore, the “hold” component of the basic keystroke is absent. There are two
notations for staccato, the normal (dot) and hard (filled triangle). In both,
the jack is not released; in hard staccato, the finger moves down and up much
more rapidly. Thus in normal staccato, the key drop may be about half way down,
but in hard staccato, it can be less than half way. In this way, the damper is
returned to the strings faster, resulting in a shorter note duration. Because
the backcheck is not engaged, the hammer can "bounce around", making repetitions
tricky at certain speeds. Thus if you have trouble with rapidly repeated
staccatos, don't immediately blame yourself -- it may be the wrong frequency at
which the hammer bounces the wrong way. By changing the speed, amount of key
drop, etc., you may be able to eliminate the problem. In normal staccato,
gravity quickly returns the damper onto the strings. In hard staccato, the
damper is actually bounced off the damper top rail, so that it returns even more
quickly. At string contact, the hammer shank flex can be negative, which makes
the effective mass of the hammer lighter; thus there is a considerable variety
of tones that you can produce with staccato. Therefore, the motions of the
hammer, backcheck, jack, and damper are all changed in staccato. Clearly, in
order to play staccato well, it helps to understand how the piano works.

Staccato is generally divided into three types depending on how it is played:

  #. Finger staccato 
  #. Wrist staccato
  #. Arm staccato (which includes both up-down motion and arm rotation)

**#1** is played mostly with the finger, holding the hand and arm still, **#2**
is played mostly with wrist action, and **#3** is usually played as a thrust
(:ref:`III.4.a`), with the playing action originating at the upper arm. As you progress
from **#1** to **#3** you add more mass behind the fingers; therefore, **#1**
gives the lightest, fastest staccato and is useful for single, soft notes, and
**#3** gives the heaviest feeling and is useful for loud passages and chords
with many notes, but is also the slowest. **#2** is in between. In practice,
most of us probably combine all three; since the wrist and arm are slower, their
amplitudes must be correspondingly reduced in order to play fast staccato. Some
teachers frown on the use of wrist staccato, preferring mostly arm staccato;
however, it is probably better to have a choice (or combination) of all three.
For example, you might be able to reduce fatigue by changing from one to the
other, although the standard method of reducing fatigue is to change fingers.
When practicing staccato, practice the three (finger, hand, arm) staccatos first
before deciding on which one to use, or on how to combine them.

Because you cannot use the arm weight for staccato, the best reference is your
steady body. Thus the body plays a major role in staccato play. Speed of
staccato repetition is controlled by the amount of up-down motion: the smaller
the motion, the faster the repetition rate, in exactly the same way as a
basketball dribble.
