.. _III.2:

2. Cycling (Chopin's Fantaisie Impromptu)
-----------------------------------------

Cycling is the best technique-building procedure for things like new or fast
passages you cannot handle. Cycling (also called "looping") is taking a segment
and playing it repeatedly; usually continually, without breaks. If the
conjunction needed for cycling continually is the same as the first note of the
segment, this segment cycles naturally; it is called a self-cycling segment. An
example is the ``C G E G`` quadruplet. If the conjunction is different, you need
to invent one that leads to the first note so you can cycle without breaks.

Cycling is basically pure repetition, but it is important to use it almost as an
anti-repetition procedure, a way to avoid mindless repetition. The idea behind
cycling is that you acquire technique so rapidly that it eliminates unnecessary,
mindless repetition. In order to avoid picking up bad habits, change the speed
and experiment with different hand/arm/finger positions for optimum play and
always work for relaxation; try not to cycle the exact same thing too many
times. Play softly (even loud sections) until you attain the technique, get up
to speeds at least 20% above final speed and, if possible, up to 2 times final
speed. Over 90% of cycling time should be at speeds that you can handle
comfortably and accurately. Then cycle down gradually to very slow speeds. You
are done when you can play at any speed for any length of time, without looking
at the hand, completely relaxed, and with full control. You might find that
certain intermediate speeds give trouble. Practice these speeds because they may
be needed when you start HT. Practice without the pedal (partly to avoid the bad
habit of not pressing down completely through the key drop) until the technique
is attained. Change hands frequently to avoid injury.

If a technique requires 10,000 repetitions (a typical requirement for really
difficult material), cycling allows you to get them done in the shortest
possible time. Representative cycle times are about 1 sec, so 10,000 cycles is
less than 4 hours. If you cycle this segment for 10 minutes per day, 5 days a week,
10,000 cycles will take almost a month. Clearly, very difficult material will
take months to learn using the best methods, and much longer if you use less
efficient methods.

Cycling is potentially the most injurious of any piano practice procedure, so
please be careful. Don't over-do it the first day, and see what happens the next
day. If nothing is sore the next day, you can continue or increase the cycling
workout. Above all, whenever you cycle, always work on two at a time, one for
the RH and another for the LH so that you can switch hands frequently. For young
people, over-cycling can result in pain; in that case, stop cycling, and the
hand should recover in a few days. In older people, over-cycling can cause
osteo-arthritic flare-ups that can take months to subside.

Let's apply cycling to Chopin's *FI*: the left hand arpeggio, bar 5. The first six
notes cycle by themselves, so you might try that. When I first tried it, the
stretch was too much for my small hands, so I got tired too quickly. What I did
was to cycle the first 12 notes. The second, easier six notes allowed my hands
to rest a little and therefore enabled me to cycle the 12 note segment longer
and at higher speed. Of course, if you really want to increase speed (not
necessary for the LH but might be useful for the RH in this piece) cycle only
the first parallel set (the first three or four notes for the LH).

Your ability to play the first segment does not automatically enable you to play
all the other arpeggios. You will need to start practically from scratch even
for the same notes one octave down. Of course, the second arpeggio will be
easier after mastering the first one, but you may be surprised at how much work
you need to repeat when a small change is made in the segment. This happens
because there are so many muscles in the body that your brain can choose a
different set of muscles to produce motions that are only slightly different
(and it usually does). Unlike a robot, you have little choice about which
muscles the brain is going to pick. Only when you have done a very large number
of such arpeggios does the next one come easily. Therefore, you should expect to
have to cycle quite few arpeggios.

In order to understand how to play this Chopin piece, it is helpful to analyze
the mathematical basis of the 3 versus 4 timing part of this composition. The RH
plays very fast, say 4 notes per half second (approximately). At the same time,
the LH is playing at a slower rate, 3 notes per half second. If all the notes
are played accurately, the audience hears a note frequency equivalent to 12
notes per half second, because this frequency corresponds to the smallest time
interval between notes. That is, if your RH is playing as fast as it can, then
by adding a SLOWER play with the LH, Chopin succeeded in accelerating this piece
to 3 times your maximum speed!

But wait, not all of the 12 notes are present; there are actually only 7, so 5
notes are missing. These missing notes create what is called a Moiré pattern,
which is a third pattern that emerges when two incommensurate patterns are
superposed. This pattern creates a wave-like effect within each measure and
Chopin reinforced this effect by using a LH arpeggio that rises and falls like a
wave in synchrony with the Moiré pattern. The acceleration of a factor of 3 and
the Moiré pattern are mysterious effects that sneak up on the audience because
they have no idea what created them, or that they even exist. Mechanisms that
affect the audience without their knowledge often produce more dramatic effects
than ones that are obvious (such as loud, legato, or rubato). The great
composers have invented an incredible number of these hidden mechanisms and a
mathematical analysis is often the easiest way to flush them out. Chopin
probably never thought in terms of incommensurate sets and Moiré patterns; he
intuitively understood these concepts because of his genius.

It is instructive to speculate on the reason for the missing 1st note of the
measure (bar 5) in the RH because if we can decipher the reason, we will know
exactly how to play it. Note that this occurs at the very beginning of the RH
melody. At the beginning of a melody or a musical phrase, composers always run
into two contradictory requirements: one is that any phrase should (in general)
begin softly, and the second is that the first note of a measure is a downbeat
and should be accented. The composer can neatly satisfy both requirements by
eliminating the first note, thus preserving the rhythm and yet start softly (no
sound in this case)! You will have no trouble finding numerous examples of this
device -- see Bach's Inventions. Another device is to start the phrase at the
end of a partial measure so that the first downbeat of the first full measure
comes after a few notes have been played (a classic example of this is the
beginning of the first movement of Beethoven's *Appassionata*). This means that
the first note of the RH in this measure of Chopin's *FI* must be soft and the
second note louder than the first, in order to strictly preserve the rhythm
(another example of the importance of rhythm!). We are not used to playing this
way; the normal play is to start the first note as a downbeat. It is especially
difficult in this case because of the speed; therefore this beginning may need
extra practice.

This composition begins by gradually drawing the audience into its rhythm like
an irresistible invitation, after calling attention to itself with the loud
octave of bar 1 followed by the rhythmic arpeggio in the lower staff. The
missing note in bar 5 is restored after several repetitions, thus doubling the
Moiré repeat frequency and the effective rhythm. In the second theme (bar 13),
the flowing melody of the RH is replaced by two broken chords, thus giving the
impression of quadrupling the rhythm. This "rhythmic acceleration" culminates in
the climactic forte of bars 19-20. The audience is then treated to a breather by
a "softening" of the rhythm created by the delayed RH melodic (pinky) note and
then its gradual fading, accomplished by the diminuendo down to :math:`pp`. The whole
cycle is then repeated, this time with added elements that heighten the climax
until it ends in the descending crashing broken chords. For practicing this
part, each broken chord might be individually cycled. These chords lack the 3,4
construct and bring you back out from the mysterious 3,4 nether-world, preparing
you for the slow section.

As with most Chopin pieces, there is no "correct" tempo for this piece. However,
if you play faster than about 2 seconds/bar, the 3x4 multiplication effect tends
to disappear and you are usually left with mostly the Moiré and other effects.
This is partly because of decreasing accuracy with speed but more importantly
because the 12x speed becomes too fast for the ear to follow. Above about 20 Hz,
repetitions begin to take on the properties of sound to the human ear. Therefore
the multiplication device works only up to about 20 Hz; above that, you get a
new effect, which is even more special than incredible speed – the “rapid notes”
turn into a “low frequency sound”. Thus 20 Hz is a kind of sound threshold. This
is why the lowest note of the piano is an A at about 27 Hz. Here is the big
surprise: there is evidence that Chopin heard this effect! Note that the fast
part is initially labeled “Allegro agitato”, which means that each note must be
clearly audible. On the metronome, Allegro corresponds to a 12X speed of 10 to
20 Hz, the right frequency to hear the multiplication, just below the “sound
threshold”. “Agitato” ensures that this frequency is audible. When this fast
section returns after the Moderato section, it is labeled Presto, corresponding
to 20 to 40 Hz -- he wanted us to play it below and above the sound threshold!
Therefore, there is mathematical evidence suggesting that Chopin knew about this
sound threshold.

The slow middle section was described briefly in :ref:`II.25`. The fastest way
to learn it, like many Chopin pieces, is to start by memorizing the LH. This is
because the chord progression often remains the same even when Chopin replaces
the RH with a new melody, because the LH mainly provides the accompaniment
chords. Notice that the 4,3 timing is now replaced by a 2,3 timing played much
more slowly. It is used for a different effect, to soften the music and allowing
a freer, tempo rubato.

The third part is similar to the first except that it is played faster,
resulting in a totally different effect, and the ending is different. This
ending is difficult for small hands and may require extra RH cycling work. In
this section, the RH pinky carries the melody, but the answering thumb octave
note is what enriches the melodic line. The piece ends with a nostalgic
restatement of the slow movement theme in the LH. Distinguish the top note of
this LH melody (``G#`` - bar 7 from the end) clearly from the same note played by
the RH by holding it slightly longer and then sustain it with the pedal.

The ``G#`` is the most important note in this piece. Thus the beginning :math:`sf`
``G#`` octave is not only a fanfare introducing the piece, but a clever way for
Chopin to implant the ``G#`` into the listeners' minds. Therefore, don't rush
this note; take your time and let it sink in. If you look throughout this piece,
you will see that the ``G#`` occupies all the important positions. In the slow
section, the ``G#`` is an ``Ab``, which is the same note. This ``G#`` is another
one of those devices in which a great composer is repeatedly "hitting the
audience on the head with a two-by-four" (``G#``), but the audience has no idea
what hit them. For the pianist, knowledge about the ``G#`` helps interpret and
memorize the piece. Thus the conceptual climax of this piece comes at the end
(as it should) when both hands must play the same ``G#`` (bars 8 and 7 from the
end); therefore, this LH-RH ``G#`` must be executed with the utmost care, while
maintaining the continuously fading RH ``G#`` octave.

Our analysis brings into sharp focus, the question of how fast to play this
piece. High accuracy is required to bring out the 12-note effect and inhumanly
accurate playing above the sound threshold. If you are learning this piece for
the first time, the 12-note frequency may not be audible initially because of
lack of accuracy. When you finally "get it" the music will all of a sudden sound
very “busy”. If you play too fast and lose the accuracy, you can lose that
factor of three -- it washes out and the audience hears only the 4 notes. For
beginners the piece can be made to sound faster by slowing down and increasing
the accuracy. Although the RH carries the melody, the LH must be clearly heard;
otherwise, both the 12-note effect and the Moiré pattern will disappear. This
being a Chopin piece, there is no requirement that the 12-note effect be heard;
this composition is amenable to an infinity of interpretations, and some may
want to suppress the LH and concentrate on the RH, and still produce something
magical.

An advantage of cycling is that the hand is playing continually which simulates
continuous playing better than if you practiced isolated segments. It also
allows you to experiment with small changes in finger position, etc., in order
to find the optimum conditions for playing. The disadvantage is that the hand
movements in cycling may be different from those needed to play the piece. The
arms tend to be stationary while cycling whereas in the actual piece, the hands
usually need to move. Therefore, in those cases in which the segment does not
naturally cycle, you may need to use segmental practice, without cycling. One
advantage of non-cycling is that you can now include the conjunction.
