.. _II.13:

13. Velocity, Choice of Practice Speed
--------------------------------------

Get up to speed as quickly as possible. Remember, we are still practicing HS.
Playing so fast that you start to feel stress and make mistakes will not
improve technique because you are mainly practicing mistakes and acquiring bad
habits. Forcing the fingers to play the same way faster is not the way to
increase speed. As demonstrated with parallel play, you need new ways that
automatically increase speed and reduce stress. In fact, with parallel play, it
is often easier to play fast than slowly. Devise hand positions and motions
that automatically increase speed; this topic is one of the major contributions
of this book, and will be treated topic by topic later on as it is too big to
be covered here; it involves such specific skills such as thumb over method,
glissando motion, relaxation, flat finger positions, arm and wrist motions,
etc., and the use of “post practice improvement”. If you do not make
significant progress in a few minutes, you are probably doing something wrong
-- think of something new. Students who use the intuitive method are resigned
to repeating the same thing for hours with little visible improvement. That
mentality must be avoided in order to learn faster. There are two types of
situations you will encounter when increasing speed. One involves technical
skills you already have; you should be able to bring these up to speed in
minutes. The other involves new skills; these will take longer and will be
discussed in :ref:`III.15` below.

Technique improves most rapidly when playing at a speed at which you can play
accurately. This is especially true when playing HT (please be patient -- I
promise we will eventually get to HT practice). Since you have more control HS,
you can get away with much faster play HS than HT without increasing stress or
forming bad habits. Thus it is erroneous to think that you can improve faster
by playing as fast as possible (after all, if you play twice as fast, you can
practice the same passage twice as often!). Since one major objective of HS
practice is to gain speed, the need to attain speed quickly and to practice
accurately become contradictory. The solution is to constantly change the speed
of practice; do not stay at any one speed for too long. For very difficult
passages that require skills you don't already have, there is no alternative
but to bring the speed up in stages. For this, use speeds that are too fast as
exploratory excursions to determine what needs to be changed in order to play
at such speeds. Then slow down and practice those new motions.

To vary the speed, first get up to some manageable "maximum speed" at which you
can play accurately. Then go faster (using parallel sets, etc., if necessary),
and take note of how the playing needs to be changed (don't worry if you are
not playing accurately at this point because you are not repeating it many
times). Then use that motion and play at the previous "maximum accurate speed".
It should now be noticeably easier. Practice at this speed for a while, then
try slower speeds to make sure that you are completely relaxed and absolutely
accurate. Then repeat the whole procedure. In this way, you ratchet up the
speed in manageable jumps and work on each needed skill separately. In most
cases, you should be able to play most of the new piece, at least in small
segments, HS, at the final speed during the first sitting. In the beginning,
getting up to speed at the first sitting may seem unattainable but, with
practice, every student can reach this objective surprisingly quickly.
