.. _II.18:

18. Fingering
-------------

Except in beginners' books, the basic fingerings are not indicated in music
scores. For those basic fingerings, go to the scales (:ref:`III.5.d` and
:ref:`III.5.h`) and arpeggio (:ref:`III.5.e`) sections; note that it is the
scales that determine the fingerings for practically all runs. Therefore it is
important to memorize the fingerings for all the scales; this is not difficult
because most scales follow a standard fingering and the exceptions follow
simple rules, such as avoiding the thumb on black keys. Playing a black key
with the thumb positions the hand too close to the fallboard, which makes it
difficult to play the white keys with the other fingers. Most scores show
fingerings for unusual situations where special fingerings are needed. Follow
these fingerings unless you have a better one; if you don't follow the
indicated fingering, you will probably get into trouble. An indicated fingering
may feel awkward at first but it is there for good reasons. These reasons often
do not become apparent until you get up to speed and/or you play HT. It is most
important to fix your fingering and not change it unless there is a good
reason. Not having a fixed fingering will slow down the learning process and
give you trouble later, especially during a performance, when a fingering
indecision can cause a mistake. If you do change the fingering, make sure that
you always stick to the new one. Mark the change on the music so that you don’t
inadvertently change it during practice; also, it can be very annoying to come
back to this music months later and not remember that nice fingering you had
previously worked out.

Not all suggested fingerings on the music score are appropriate for everyone.
You may have large or small hands. You may have gotten used to a different
fingering because of the way you learned. You might have a different skill set;
e.g., you might be a better triller using 1,3 than 2,3. Music from different
publishers may have different fingerings. For advanced players, the fingering
can have a profound influence on the musical effect you want to project.
Fortunately, the methods of this book are well suited to quickly changing
fingerings. Once you have become familiar with the methods of this book, you
will be able to change fingering very quickly. Make all the changes before you
start HT practice because once fingerings are incorporated into HT play, they
become very difficult to change. On the other hand, some fingerings are easy HS
but become difficult HT, so it pays to check them HT before permanently
accepting any changes.

In summary, fingering is critically important. Beginners should not start
practicing without knowing the proper fingerings. If you are uncertain about
fingering, try to find sheet music with plenty of fingering indications or go
to an internet piano forum and ask for help. If you look at how the scales and
arpeggios are fingered, you will find some simple “common sense” rules of
fingering; these should be enough to get you started.
