.. _II.16:

16. Dangers of Slow Play - Pitfalls of the Intuitive Method
-----------------------------------------------------------

Why is repetitive slow play (intuitive method) harmful when starting a new
piece?  When you start, there is no way of knowing whether the slow play motion
you are using is right or wrong. The probability of playing incorrectly is
nearly 100%, because there is almost an infinity of ways to play incorrectly
but only one best way. When this wrong motion is speeded up, the student will
hit a speed wall. Assuming that this student succeeded in overcoming the speed
wall by finding a new way to play, s/he will then need to unlearn the old way
and relearn this new play, and keep repeating these cycles for each incremental
increase in speed until s/he reaches the final speed. Thus the method of slowly
ramping up the speed can waste a lot of time.

Let's look at an example of how different speeds require different motions.
Consider the horse's gait. As the speed is increased, the gait goes through
walk, trot, canter, and gallop. Each of these four gaits usually has at least a
slow and fast mode. Also, a left turn is different from a right turn (the
leading hoof is different). That's a minimum of 16 motions. These are the
so-called natural gaits; most horses automatically have them; they can also be
taught 3 more gaits: pace, foxtrot, and rack, which likewise have slow, fast,
left, and right: all this, with only four legs of relatively simple structure
and a comparatively limited brain. We have 10 complex fingers, more versatile
shoulders, arms, and hands, and a much more capable brain! Our hands are
therefore capable of performing many more "gaits" than a horse. Most students
have little idea of how many motions are possible unless the teacher points
these out to them. Two students, left to their own devices and asked to play
the same piece, will be guaranteed to end up with different hand motions. This
is another reason why it is so important to take lessons from a good teacher
when starting piano; such a teacher can quickly weed out the bad motions.

Ramping up a slow play in piano is like forcing a horse run as fast as a gallop
by simply speeding up the walk -- it can't be done because as the speed
increases, the momenta of the legs, body, etc., change, requiring the different
gaits. Therefore, if the music requires a "gallop", the student ends up having
to learn all the intervening "gaits" if you ramp up the speed. Forcing a horse
to walk as fast as a gallop would erect speed walls, produce stress, and cause
injury.

A common slow-play mistake is the habit of supporting or lifting the hand. In
slow play, the hand can be lifted between notes when the downward pressure is
not necessary. When speeded up, this "lift" habit coincides with the next
keydrop; these actions cancel, resulting in a missed note. Another common error
is the waving of the free fingers -- while playing fingers 1 and 2, the student
might be waving fingers 4 and 5 in the air several times. This presents no
difficulties until the motion is speeded up so fast that there is no time to
wave the fingers. In this situation, the free fingers will not automatically
stop waving at faster speeds because the motion has been ingrained by hundreds
or even thousands of repetitions. Instead, the fingers are asked to wave
several times at speeds they cannot attain -- this creates the speed wall. The
trouble here is that most students who use slow practice are unaware of these
bad habits. If you know how to play fast, it is safe to play slowly, but if you
don't know how to play fast, you must be careful not to learn the wrong slow
playing habits or to end up wasting tremendous amounts of time. Slow play can
waste huge chunks of time because each run-through takes so long. As you speed
up, you will need to increase the downward pressure because you are pressing
more keys in the same interval of time. Thus “feeling gravity” doesn’t work
most of the time because different downward pressures are needed as you play.

Another problem associated with the intuitive slow practice approach is
unnecessary body motions. These motions create more difficulties at higher
speeds. Unless they video record their playing and watch carefully for strange
body motions, most pianists are unaware of all the motions they make. These can
cause unpredictable mistakes at unpredictable times, creating psychological
problems with insecurity and nervousness. Cultivating an awareness of body
motions can eliminate this problem. We see that intuition can lead to a myriad
of difficulties; instead of intuition, we need a knowledge based system.
