.. _II.10:

10. Gravity Drop, Chord Practice, and Relaxation
------------------------------------------------

Learning to play accurate chords is the first step in applying the chord
attack. Let's practice the above LH ``C E G`` chord. The arm weight method is
the best way to achieve accuracy and relaxation; this approach has been
adequately treated in the referenced books (Fink, Sandor) and therefore will be
discussed only briefly here. Place your fingers on the keys to play ``C E G``.
Relax your arm (the whole body, actually), keep your wrist flexible, lift the
hand from 5 to 20 cm above the keys (the shorter distance in the beginning),
and let gravity drop your hand. Let the hand and fingers drop as a unit, do not
move the fingers. Relax the hands completely during the drop, then "set" your
fingers and wrist at the time of impact with the keys and let the wrist flex
slightly to take the shock of landing and to depress the keys. By letting
gravity lower your hand, you are referencing your strength or sensitivity to a
constant force.

It may seem unbelievable at first, but an under-weight 6-year-old and a
gargantuan sumo wrestler dropping their hands from the same height will produce
sound of the same loudness, if they both perform the gravity drop correctly
(which is not easy, especially for the sumo wrestler). This happens because the
speed of gravitational fall is independent of mass and the hammer goes into
free flight as soon as the knuckle leaves the jack. Physics students will
recognize that in the elastic limit (billiard ball collision), kinetic energy
is conserved and the above statements do not hold. In such an elastic
collision, the piano key would fly off the fingertip at high velocity, like a
golf ball bouncing off a concrete floor. But here, because the fingers are
relaxed and the fingertips are soft (inelastic collision), kinetic energy is
not conserved and the small mass (piano key) can stay with the large mass
(finger-hand-arm), resulting in a controlled keydrop. Therefore, the above
statements hold as long as the piano is properly regulated and the effective
mass for the key drop is much smaller than the mass of the 6-year-old's hand.
Stiffening the hand after impact ensures that the entire arm weight transfers
to the key drop. Do not stiffen the hand before hitting the bottom of the
keydrop because this will add force – we only want gravity to play the keys.

Strictly speaking, the sumo wrestler will make a slightly louder sound because
of momentum conservation, but the difference will be small, in spite of the
fact that his arm may be 20 times heavier. Another surprise is that, once
properly taught, the gravity drop may produce the loudest sound that this
youngster has ever played (for a high drop), and is an excellent way to teach
youngsters how to play firmly. Start with short drops for small youngsters
because, in the beginning, a truly free drop can be painful if the height is
too high. For a successful gravity drop, especially for youngsters, it is
important to teach them to make-believe that there is no piano and the hand
should feel like it is falling through the keyboard (but is stopped by it).
Otherwise, most youngsters will subconsciously lift the hand as it lands on the
piano. In other words, the gravity drop is a constant acceleration and the hand
is accelerating, even during the key drop. At the end, the hand is resting on
the keys with its own weight -- this way of playing produces a pleasant, deep,
tone. Note that it is important for the key drop to accelerate all the way down
- see :ref:`III.1` on producing good tone.

The well-known Steinway "accelerated action" works because it adds acceleration
to the hammer motion by use of a rounded support under the center key bushing.
This causes the pivot point to move forward with the keydrop thus shortening
the front side of the key and lengthening the back side and thereby causing the
capstan to accelerate for a constant keydrop. This illustrates the importance
piano designers place on accelerating the keydrop, and the arm weight method
ensures that we take full advantage of gravitational acceleration to produce
good tone. The effectiveness of the "accelerated action" is controversial
because there are excellent pianos without this feature. Obviously, it is more
important for the pianist to control this acceleration than to depend on the
piano.

The fingers must be "set" after the keys reach the bottom of the keydrop in
order to stop the hand’s downward motion. This requires a brief application of
force to the finger. As soon as the hand stops, remove this force and relax
completely so that you can feel gravity pulling the arm down. Rest the hand on
the key with only this gravitational force keeping the keys down. What you have
just accomplished is to depress the key with the least possible effort; this is
the essence of relaxation. Note that an important element of relaxation is the
immediate relaxation of all muscles once the gravity drop is over.

Beginning students will play chords with too many unnecessary forces that can
not be accurately controlled. The use of gravity can eliminate all unnecessary
forces or tenseness. It might seem like a curious coincidence that the force of
gravity is the right force for playing the piano. This is no coincidence.
Humans evolved under the influence of gravity. Our strengths for walking,
lifting, etc., evolved to match gravity exactly. The piano, of course, was
designed to match those strengths. When you are truly relaxed, you can feel the
effect of gravity on your hands as you are playing. Some teachers emphasize
relaxation to the point of neglecting everything else until "total" relaxation
is achieved; that may be going too far -- being able to feel gravity is a
necessary and sufficient criterion for relaxation. The gravity drop is a method
for practicing relaxation. Once this relaxed state is achieved, it must become
a permanent, integral part of your piano playing. Total relaxation does not
mean that you should always play the piano using only gravity. Most of the
time, you will be applying your own force; “feeling gravity” is simply a way of
measuring your level of relaxation.
