.. _II.1:

1. The Practice Routine
-----------------------

Many students use the following practice routine:

  A. First, practice scales or technical exercises until the fingers are limbered
     up. Continue this for 30 minutes or longer if you have time, to improve
     technique especially by using exercises such as the Hanon series.
  B. Then take a new piece of music and slowly read it for a page or two,
     carefully playing both hands together, starting from the beginning. This slow
     play is repeated until it can be performed reasonably well and then it is
     gradually speeded up until the final speed is attained. A metronome might be
     used for this gradual speed-up.
  C. At the end of a two hour practice, the fingers are flying, so the students
     can play as fast as they want and enjoy the experience before quitting. After
     all, they are tired of practicing so that they can relax, play their hearts out
     at full speed; this is the time to enjoy the music!
  D. Once the piece can be played satisfactorily, memorize it and practice “until
     the music is in the hands”.
  E. On the day of the recital or lesson, practice the piece at correct speed (or
     faster!) as many times as possible in order to make sure that it is in top
     condition. This is the last chance; obviously, the more practice, the better.

**Every step of this procedure is wrong!** The above will almost guarantee that
the students will not progress beyond intermediate level even if they practice
several hours daily. For example, this method tells the students nothing about
what to do when they hit an impossible passage except to keep repeating,
sometimes for a lifetime, with no clear idea of when or how the needed technique
will be acquired. This method leaves the task of learning to play the piano
completely to the student. Moreover, the music will come out flat during the
recital and unexpected flubs will be almost unavoidable. You will understand all
this as soon as you read about the more efficient methods described below.

Lack of progress is the main reason why so many students quit piano. Students,
especially youngsters, are smart; why work like a slave and learn nothing?
Reward the students and you will get more dedication than any teacher could
want. You can be a doctor, scientist, lawyer, athlete, or anything you want, and
still become a good pianist. This is because there are methods that let you
acquire technique quickly, as we shall soon see.

Note that the above practice routine is an "intuitive" (or “instinctive”)
method. If a person of average intelligence were marooned on an island with a
piano and decided to practice, that person would most likely devise a practice
method like the one above. That is, a teacher teaching this type of practice
routine isn't teaching anything -- the method is intuitive. When I first started
to compile the "correct learning procedures" of this book, I was struck most by
how counter-intuitive many of them were. I will explain later why they are so
counter-intuitive but this offers the best explanation for why so many teachers
use the intuitive approach. These teachers never learned the correct methods and
therefore gravitated naturally to the intuitive methods. The trouble with
counter-intuitive methods is that they are harder to adopt than intuitive ones;
your brain is constantly telling you that they are not right and to get back to
the intuitive ones. This message from the brain can become irresistible just
before a lesson or recital -- try telling (uninformed) students not to enjoy
playing their finished pieces before quitting practice, or not to over-practice
on recital day! It is not only the students or teachers. It is also any parents
or friends with good intentions that influence the practice routines of young
students. Parents who are not informed will always force their children to use
the intuitive methods. This is one reason why good teachers always ask parents
to accompany their children to the lessons. If the parents are not informed,
there is a virtual guarantee that they will force the students to use methods
that are in direct contradiction to the teacher's instructions.

Students who started with the correct methods from the beginning are the
“apparently lucky” ones. However, they must be careful later in life if they
weren’t taught what the wrong methods are. Once they leave the teacher, they
can stumble into the intuitive methods and have no idea why everything is
suddenly falling apart. It's like a bear that had never seen a bear trap -- it
gets caught every time. These “lucky” ones often can't teach either, because
they may not know that many intuitive methods can lead to disaster. On the
other hand, the apparently “unlucky” students who first learned the intuitive
methods and then changed over to the better ones have some unexpected
advantages. They know both the right and wrong methods and often make much
better teachers. Therefore, although this book teaches the correct methods, it
is equally important to know what NOT to do, and why. This is why the most
frequently used wrong methods are extensively discussed here.

We describe the components of a proper practice routine in the following
sections. They are presented in approximately the order in which a student
might use them from start to finish of a new piece of music. Beginners please
read :ref:`III.18` first.

