.. _II.2:

2. Finger Positions
-------------------

Relax the fingers and place your hand on a flat surface with all the fingertips
resting on the surface and the wrist at the same height as the knuckles. The
hand and fingers should form a dome. All the fingers should be curved. The
thumb should point slightly down and bend slightly towards the fingers so that
the last (nail) phalange of the thumb is parallel to the other fingers (viewed
from above). This slight inward bend of the thumb is useful when playing chords
with wide spans. It positions the tip of the thumb parallel to the keys making
it less likely to hit adjacent keys. It also orients the thumb so that the
correct muscles are used to raise and lower it. The fingers are slightly
curled, curving down and meeting the surface at angles near 45 degrees. This
curled configuration allows the fingers to play between the black keys. The tip
of the thumb and the other fingertips should form an approximate semicircle on
the flat surface. If you do this with both hands side by side, the two
thumbnails should be facing each other. Use the part of the thumb directly
below the thumbnails to play, not the joint between the nail phalange and the
middle phalange. The thumb is already too short; therefore, play with its tip
for maximum uniformity with all the fingers. For the other fingers, the bone
comes close to the skin at the fingertips. At the front pad of the fingertip
(opposite the fingernail), the flesh is thicker. This front pad should contact
the keys, not the fingertip.

This is the starting position. Once you begin play, you may need to stretch the
fingers almost straight, or curl them more, depending on what you are playing.
Therefore, although the beginner must learn the ideal curled position, strict
adherence to a fixed curled configuration is not correct; this will be
discussed in detail later on, especially because the curled position has
significant disadvantages.
