.. _II.21:

21. Building Endurance, Breathing
---------------------------------

"Endurance" is a controversial term in piano practice. This controversy
originates from the fact that piano playing requires control, not muscle power,
and many students have the wrong impression that they will not acquire
technique until they grow enough muscles. On the other hand, a certain amount
of endurance is necessary. This apparent contradiction can be resolved by
understanding exactly what is needed and how to get it. Obviously, you can't
play loud, grandiose passages without expending energy. Big, strong, pianists
can certainly produce more sound than small, weak, pianists if they are equally
skillful. And the stronger pianists can more easily play "demanding" pieces.
Every pianist has enough physical stamina to play pieces at her/is level,
simply because of the amount of practice that was required to get there. Yet we
know that endurance is a problem. The answer lies in relaxation. When stamina
becomes an issue, it is almost always caused by excess tension.

One example of this is the LH octave tremolo in the first movement of
Beethoven's Pathetique. The only thing over 90% of the students need to do is
to eliminate stress; yet many students practice it for months with little
progress. The first mistake they make is to practice it too loud. This adds
extra stress and fatigue when you can least afford it. Practice it softly,
concentrating on eliminating stress, as explained in :ref:`III.3.b`. In a week
or two, you will be playing as many tremolos as fast as you want. Now start
adding loudness and expression. Done! At this point, your physical strength and
endurance is not much different from what it was when you started a few weeks
ago -- the main thing you did was to find the best way to eliminate stress.

Playing demanding pieces requires about as much energy as a slow jog, at about
4 miles per hour, with the brain requiring almost half the total energy. Many
youngsters cannot jog continuously for over one mile. Therefore, asking
youngsters to practice difficult passages continually for 20 minutes would
really strain their stamina because it would be about equivalent to jogging a
mile. Teachers and parents must be careful when youngsters start their piano
lessons, to limit practice times to under 15 minutes in the beginning until the
students gain sufficient stamina. Marathon runners have stamina, but they are
not muscular. You need to condition the body for stamina for piano, but you
don't need extra muscles.

Now there is a difference between piano playing and running a marathon because
of the need to condition the brain for stamina in addition to the muscular
conditioning. Therefore mindless practicing of exercises for stamina does not
work. The most efficient ways to gain stamina are to either play finished
pieces and make music, or practice difficult sections HS continuously. Again
using the jogging comparison, it would be hard for most students to practice
difficult material continuously for more than a few hours because 2 hours of
practice would be equivalent to jogging 6 miles, which is a terrific workout.
Therefore, you will have to play some easy pieces between the hard practice
sessions. Concentrated practice sessions longer than a few hours may not be
that helpful until you are at an advanced level, when you have developed
sufficient "piano stamina". It is probably better to take a break and restart
practice after some rest. Clearly, hard piano practice is strenuous work and
serious practicing can put the student in good physical shape. HS practice is
most valuable in this regard because it allows one hand to rest while the other
works hard, allowing the pianist to work as hard as s/he wants, 100% of the
time, without injury or fatigue. Of course, in terms of stamina, it is not
difficult (if you have the time) to put in 6 or 8 hours of practice a day by
including a lot of mindless finger exercises. This is a process of
self-delusion in which the student thinks that just putting in the time will
get you there -- it will not. If anything, conditioning the brain is more
important than conditioning the muscles because, for most students, it is the
brain that needs more conditioning. Brain conditioning is especially important
for performing. Strenuous conditioning of the muscles will cause the body to
convert fast muscles to slow muscles (they have more endurance) -- this is
exactly what you do not want. Therefore, contrary to common belief, pianists do
not need more muscle; they need more nerve control and conversion of slow to
fast muscles – see :ref:`III.7.a`.

What is stamina? It is something that enables us to keep on playing without
getting tired. For long practice sessions of over several hours, pianists get
their second wind just as athletes do (especially marathoners). Therefore, if
you feel general fatigue, look for the second wind to kick in – this conscious
knowledge of the second wind can make it kick in more reliably, especially
after you have experienced it several times so that you know what it feels
like. Therefore do not get into the habit of resting every time you feel tired
if there is a chance that you might be able to catch the second wind.

Can we identify any biological factors that control stamina? Knowing the
biological basis is the best way to understand stamina. In the absence of
specific bio-physical studies for pianists, we can only speculate. Clearly, we
need sufficient oxygen intake and adequate blood flow to the muscles, certain
organs, and the brain. The biggest factor influencing oxygen intake is lung
efficiency, and important components of that are breathing and posture. This
may be one reason why meditation, with emphasis on proper breathing using the
diaphragm, is so helpful. Use of only the rib muscles to breathe over-utilizes
one breathing apparatus and under-utilizes the diaphragm. The resulting rapid
pumping of the chest or exaggerated chest expansion can interfere with piano
playing because all of the piano playing muscles eventually anchor near the
center of the chest. Use of the diaphragm interferes less with the playing
motions. In addition, those who do not use the diaphragm consciously can tense
it when stress builds up during play, and they will not even notice that the
diaphragm is tense. By using both the ribs and the diaphragm, and maintaining
good posture, the lungs can be expanded to their maximum volume with least
effort and thereby take in the maximum amount of oxygen.

The following breathing exercise can be extremely helpful, not only for piano,
but also for general well-being. Expand your chest, push your diaphragm down
(this will make your lower abdomen bulge out), raise the shoulders up and
towards your back, and take a deep breath; then exhale completely by reversing
the process. When taking a deep breath, complete exhalation is more important
than a full intake. Breathe through your throat, not through the nose (the
mouth can be open or closed). Most people will constrict the nasal air passage
if they try to suck air through the nose. Instead, relax your nose muscles and
suck air through the throat region close to the vocal chords -- even with the
mouth closed, this procedure will relax the nose muscles, allowing more air to
pass through the nose. If you had not taken deep breaths for a long time, this
breathing should cause hyper-ventilation -- you will feel dizzy -- after one or
two such exercises. Stop if you hyper-ventilate. Then repeat this exercise at a
later time; you should find that you can take more breaths without hyper-
ventilating. Repeat this exercise until you can take at least 5 full breaths in
succession without hyper-ventilating. Now, if you go to the doctor’s office and
he checks you out with his stethoscope and asks you to take a deep breath, you
can do it without feeling dizzy! Breathing normally, while playing something
difficult, is an important element of relaxation. Perform this exercise at
least once every several months and incorporate it into your normal breathing
habit at and away from the piano.

Piano practice can be healthy or unhealthy depending on how you practice. Many
students forget to breathe while practicing difficult material; this bad habit
is unhealthy. It reduces oxygen flow to the brain when it needs it most,
resulting in apoxia and symptoms similar to sleep apnea (organ damage, high
blood pressure, etc.). The lack of oxygen will make musical and mental play
difficult, and make it impossible to increase mental stamina.

Other methods of increasing stamina are to increase the blood flow and to
increase the amount of blood in the body. In piano playing, extra blood flow is
needed in the brain as well as the playing mechanism; therefore, you should
fully and simultaneously exercise the muscles and the brain during practice.
This will cause the body to manufacture more blood, in response to the higher
demand for blood. Mindless repetitions of exercises, etc., are not helpful in
this respect because you can shut off the brain, thus reducing the need for
more blood. Practicing after a large meal also increases the blood supply and
conversely, resting after every meal will reduce stamina – there is a
well-known Japanese saying that claims that you will turn into a cow if you
sleep after a meal. Since most people do not have enough blood to engage in
strenuous activity with a full stomach, the body will rebel initially by making
you feel terrible, but this is an expected reaction. Such activity must be
conducted within safe medical limits; for example you may temporarily
experience digestive problems or dizziness (which is probably the rationale
behind the misguided belief that you should not exercise after a large meal).
Once the body manufactures the necessary extra blood, these problems will
disappear. Therefore, you should stay as active as you can after a meal, in
order to prevent anemia. Practicing immediately after a meal will require blood
for digestion, for the playing muscles, and for the brain, thus placing the
greatest demand on blood supply. Clearly, participation in sports, proper
health, and physical exercise are helpful for gaining stamina in piano playing.

In summary, beginners who have never touched a piano previously will need to
develop their stamina gradually because piano practice is strenuous work.
Parents must be careful about the practice time of very young beginners and
allow them to quit or take a rest when they get tired (about 10-15 min.). Never
allow a sick child to practice piano, even easy pieces, because of the risk of
aggravating the illness and of brain damage. At any skill level, we all have
more muscle than we need to play the piano pieces at our level. Even
professional pianists who practice over 6 hours every day don't end up looking
like Popeye. Franz Liszt was thin, not muscular. Thus acquiring technique and
stamina is not a matter of building muscle, but of learning how to relax and to
use our energy properly.
