.. _II.25:

25. Hands Together and Mental Play 
----------------------------------

We can finally start putting the hands together (HT)! Some students encounter
the most difficulties here, especially in the first few years of piano lessons.
Although the methods presented here should immediately help you to acquire
technique faster, it will take about two years to be able to really take
advantage of everything that the methods of this book have to offer.

Playing HT is almost like trying to think about two different things at the
same time. There is no known, pre-programmed coordination between the two hands
like we have between our two eyes (for judging distance), our ears (for
determining the direction of oncoming sound) or our legs/arms (for walking).
Therefore, learning to coordinate the fingers of the two hands accurately is
going to take some work. The preceding HS work makes this coordination much
easier to learn because we now only have to concentrate on coordinating, and
not coordinating AND developing finger/hand technique at the same time.

The good news is that there is only one primary "secret" for learning HT
quickly. That "secret" is adequate HS work, so you already know it! All
technique must be acquired HS; don't try to acquire technique HT that you can
acquire HS. By now, the reasons should be obvious. If you try to acquire
technique HT, you will run into problems such as: 

  #. Developing stress 
  #. Unbalancing the hands (the RH tends to get stronger) 
  #. Acquiring bad habits
  #. Creating speed walls

Note that all speed walls are created; they result from incorrect play or
stress. Premature HT practice can create any number of speed walls. Incorrect
motions are another major problem; some motions present no problems when played
slowly HT but become impossible when speeded up. The best example of this is
"thumb under" play (:ref:`III.5`).

First, you will need some criterion for deciding when you have done adequate HS
practice. A good criterion is HS speed. Typically, the maximum HT speed you can
play is 50% to 90% of the slower HS speed, either the RH or the LH. Suppose
that you can play the RH at speed 10 and the LH at speed 9. Then your maximum
HT speed may be 7. The quickest way to raise this HT speed to 9 would be to
raise the RH speed to 12 and the LH speed to 11. As a general rule, get the HS
speed well above final speed. Therefore, the criterion we were seeking is: if
you can play HS at 110% to 150% of final speed, relaxed, and in control, then
you are ready for HT practice.

If you still have trouble, use the method of “outlining”. Let’s assume that you
can play HS satisfactorily. Now simplify one or both hands so that you can play
them HT easily, then gradually add the deleted material. There are many ways to
do this, and you can develop really powerful methods depending on how much
music theory you know, so outlining will be discussed in more detail in
:ref:`III.8`.  However, you don’t need theory to use outlining; one example is
the method of “adding notes”: take a short segment of the difficult section,
then play the more difficult hand HS, repeating the section continuously (this
is called cycling, see :ref:`III.2`); now start adding the easier hand note by
note.  First add one note and practice until you can play it satisfactorily.
Then add another, etc., until the segment is complete. Make sure that, as you
add notes, you keep the same fingering as used during HS practice. Very often,
the reason why you cannot play HT although you can play HS is that there is an
error somewhere. Frequently, this error is in the rhythm. Therefore, as you add
notes, try to find out if there is an error in one hand; this is best
accomplished by referring back to the music score.

There is a world of difference in how the brain handles tasks in one hand and
tasks that require two-hand coordination, which is why it pays to learn them
one at a time. HS practice does not tend to form habits not directly controlled
by the brain because the brain controls each hand directly. HT motions, on the
other hand, can be cultivated only by repetition, creating a reflex habit,
which may involve nerve cells outside the brain. One indication of this is the
fact that HT motions take longer to learn. Therefore, bad HT habits are the
worst because, once formed, they take forever to eliminate. To acquire
technique quickly, you must avoid this category of bad habits.

Mental play (MP) is necessary for HT play exactly as for HS play but HT MP is,
of course, more difficult for beginners. Once you become good at MP, HS and HT
MP will be equally easy. Since you already know HS mental play (:ref:`II.12`),
the main remaining job is to learn it HT. When memorizing MP HS, you should
have encountered places in every composition where you had to go back and check
it at the piano – you can play it at the piano but not in your mind – those
places weren’t entirely in your head yet. Those are the places where you could
have had blackouts during performances. As a test that you have solid MP, there
are 3 things that you should be able to do in your mind: 

  #. Can you start from anywhere in the piece and start playing HT? 
  #. Given any section that you are playing one hand, can you add the other hand?
  #. Can you play both hands simultaneously in your head? 

You should find that if you can do these in your mind, you can easily do them
at the piano.

Let us now proceed with real life examples of how to practice HT. I have chosen
3 examples to illustrate HT methods, starting with the easiest, the 1st
movement of Beethoven’s *Moonlight Sonata*, then Mozart’s *Rondo Alla Turca*,
and finally, the challenging *Fantaisie-Impromptu* (FI) by Chopin. You should
choose the one best suited to your skill level. You might also try the Bach
Inventions that are covered in detail in sections :ref:`III.6.l` and
:ref:`III.19`. I will leave the *Für Elise*, discussed above, for you to try by
yourself, as it is fairly short and relatively straightforward. For many
pianists, *Für Elise* is “too familiar” and often difficult to play; in that
case, play it in a subdued way, concentrating on accuracy instead of emotion
(no rubato), and let the music speak for itself.  It can be quite effective
with the right audience. This “detached” play can be useful for popular,
familiar music.

The three compositions chosen here present certain challenges. The *Moonlight*
requires legato, PP, and the music of Beethoven. The *Alla Turca* must sound like
Mozart, is fairly fast and requires accurate, independent hand control as well
as solid octave play. The FI requires the ability to play 4-against-3 and
2-against-3 in the 2 hands, extremely fast RH fingering, the romanticism of
Chopin, and accurate pedaling. All three are relatively easy to play HT in the
mind because the LH is mostly an accompaniment to the RH; in the Bach
*Inventions*, both hands play major roles and HT MP is more difficult. This
demonstrates that Bach probably taught MP and purposely composed challenging
pieces for his students. This increased difficulty also explains why, without
proper guidance (such as this book), some students find the *Inventions*
extremely difficult to memorize and play at speed.

Beethoven’s Moonlight, 1st Movement, Op. 27, No. 2
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The most notable controversy about this movement is the pedaling. Beethoven’s
instruction “senza sordini” translates to “without dampers” which means that
the pedal should be down from the beginning to the end. Most pianists have not
followed this instruction because on modern concert grands the sustain is so
long (much longer than on Beethoven’s piano) that the mixture of all those
notes creates a background roar that is considered crude in conventional piano
pedagogy. Certainly, no piano teacher will allow the student to do that!
However, Beethoven was not only an extremist, but loved to break the rules. The
*Moonlight* is built on contrast. The first movement is slow, legato, pedaled,
and soft. The 3rd movement is the extreme opposite; it is simply a variation on
the first movement played very fast and agitato – this is confirmed by the
observation that the top double octave of bar 2 in the 3rd movement is an
abbreviated form of the 3-note theme prominent in the 1st movement, discussed
below (see :ref:`III.5` for discussions of the 3rd movement). There is also a
glaring contrast between the dissonances and the clear harmonies that give this
first movement its famous quality. The background dissonance is created by the
pedal, as well as the ninths, etc. Thus the dissonances are there in order to
make the harmonies stand out, like a sparkling diamond on a dark velvet
background. Being the extremist that he is, he chose the most harmonious theme
possible: one note repeated three times (bar 5)! Therefore, my interpretation
is that the pedal should be down throughout the piece just as Beethoven
instructed. With most pianos, this should present no problems; however, with
concert grands, it gets difficult because the background din becomes louder as
you play and you still have to play PP (“sempre pianissimo”); in that case you
might reduce the background slightly, but never cut it out completely, as it is
part of the music. This is not the way you will hear it in recordings, where
the emphasis is usually on the clear harmonies, eliminating the background –
the “standard” convention for “correct” pedaling. However, Beethoven may have
decided to break that rule here. This is why he did not put any pedal markings
in the whole movement – because you never have to lift it. Having decided to
fully engage the damper pedal throughout, the first rule in learning this piece
is not to use the pedal at all until you can play it comfortably HT. This will
enable you to learn how to play legato, which can only be practiced without the
pedal. Although it is played very softly, there is no need for the soft pedal
in this piece; moreover, with most practice pianos, the action is not
sufficiently smooth, with the soft pedal depressed, to enable the desired
control at PP.

Start by memorizing HS, say bars 1-5, and immediately commit it to mental play.
Pay attention to all the expression markings. It is in cut time, but the 2
first bars are like an introduction and have only one LH octave note each; the
rest are played more strictly cut time. Beethoven tells us immediately, in bar
2, that dissonance is going to be a major component of this movement by
inserting the octave B in the LH, jarring the audience with a dissonance.
Continue memorizing in segments until the end.

The LH octaves must be held. For example, play the LH ``C#`` octave of bar 1
using fingers 51, but immediately slip the 4, then 3 finger onto the lower
``C#``, replacing the 5, holding this lower ``C#`` down. You will end up
holding the octave 31 before you reach bar 2. Now hold the 3 as you play the ``B``
octave of bar 2 with 51. In this way, you maintain complete legato in the LH
going down. Using this procedure, you cannot maintain complete legato with the
1 finger, but hold that as long as you can. In the transition from bar 3 to 4,
the LH octave must come up. In that case, play the ``F#`` of bar 3 with 51,
then hold the 5 and play the next ``G#`` octave with 41. Similarly, for bars 4
to 5, play the 2nd ``G#`` octave of bar 4 with 51, then replace finger 1 with 2
while holding it down (you may have to lift the 5) so that you can play the
following chord of bar 5, fingers 521, and maintain the legato. The general
idea is to hold as many notes as you can, especially the lower note for the LH
and the upper note for the RH. There are usually several ways to do these
“holds”, so you should experiment to see which is best for you in a particular
situation. The choice of a specific hold procedure depends mostly on the size
of your hand. For example, the LH octave of bar 1 could have been played 41 or
31 so that you do not have to replace any fingers; this has the advantage of
simplicity, but has the disadvantage that you need to remember that when you
start the piece. Throughout this piece, use the “finger replacement” method to
hold as much legato as possible. You must decide on a specific replacement
procedure when you first memorize the piece and always use that same one.

Why hold the note legato when you are eventually going to hold all the notes
with the pedal anyway? Firstly, how you depress the key depends on how you hold
it; therefore, you can play a more consistent and authoritative legato by
holding. Secondly, if you lift the key but hold the note with the pedal, the
backcheck releases the hammer, allowing it to flop around, and this “looseness”
of the action is audible – the nature of the sound changes. Moreover, as
commander of the piano, you always want the backcheck to hold the hammer so
that you have complete control over the entire piano action. This degree of
control is extremely important when playing PP – you can’t control the PP if
the hammer is flopping around. Another reason for holding is that it provides
absolute accuracy because your hand never leaves the keyboard and the held note
acts as a reference for finding the following notes.

Music – how to make music? Bar 1 is not just a series of 4 triplets. They must
be logically connected; therefore, pay attention to the connection between the
top note of each triplet and the bottom note of the next triplet. This
connection is especially important when transitioning from one bar to the next,
and the lowest note often has melodic value, as in bars 4-5, 9-10, etc. The RH
of bar 5 starts with the lowest note, ``E``, and the music rises all the way to the
``G#`` of the 3-note theme. This theme should not be played “alone” but is the
culmination of the arpeggic rise of the preceding triplet. If you have
difficulty reaching the RH ninth of bar 8, play the lower note with the LH;
similarly, at bar 16. In these instances, you cannot completely hold the legato
in the LH, but the legato in the RH is more important, and the lifting of the
LH can be made less audible when you use the pedal later. However, if you can
reach it easily, you should try to play the ninth with the RH alone because
that will allow you to hold more notes in the LH. Although the first note of
the 3-note theme is an octave ``G#``, the top note should be distinct from, and
firmer than, the lower note. Bars 32-35 is a series of rising triplets of
increasing tension. Bars 36-37 should be connected, because is it one smooth
release of that tension.

The beginning is PP to bar 25 where there is a crescendo, decreasing to P in
bar 28, and returning to PP in bar 42. In most cresc. and decresc., most of the
increase or decrease should come near the end, not near the beginning. There is
an unexpected crescendo in bar 48, and an abrupt jump to P at the first note of
bar 49. This is the clearest indication that Beethoven wanted a clear harmony
superposed on a dissonant din created by the pedal. The “ending” starts near
bar 55. Be careful to observe the cut time; in particular, emphasize the first
and third beats of bar 57. What appears to be a normal ending is indicated by
the (wrong) accents on the 4th beat of bar 58 and the 3rd beat of bar 59. The
first chord of bar 60 is a false ending. Most composers would have ended the
music here; it is the same chord as the first chord of this movement - a
characteristic of standard endings. However, Beethoven often used double
endings, which makes the real ending more “final”. He immediately picks up the
beat and leads you to the true ending, using a nostalgic recapitulation of the
3-note theme played by the LH, all played PP. The final two chords should be
the softest notes of the entire movement, which is difficult because they
contain so many notes.

For HT play, this movement presents no problems. The only new element is the
holding of notes for legato which requires extra control over both hands
simultaneously.

Once you have memorized the whole movement and can play it HT satisfactorily,
add the pedal. If you choose to keep the pedal down all the time, the melody of
the top notes in bars 5-9 can be played as an ethereal apparition superposed on
a background dissonance created by the chord progressions. Beethoven probably
chose this construction to demonstrate the sonority of the new pianos of that
time and to explore their capabilities. This observation supports the idea that
the dissonant background should not be completely eliminated by judiciously
lifting the pedal.

Mozart’s Rondo Alla Turca, from Sonata K300 (K331).
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

I am going to assume that you have already done the HS homework, and begin with
the HT part especially because HS play is relatively simple with most of
Mozart’s music. The discussions will center on the issues of technical
difficulties and “how to make it sound like Mozart”. Before starting on the
details, let’s discuss the structure of the entire sonata because, if you learn
its final section, you may decide to learn the whole thing -- there is not a
single page of this sonata that is not fascinating.

The term sonata has been applied to so many types of music that it does not
have a unique definition; it evolved and changed with time. In the earliest
times, it simply meant music or song. Prior to, and including, Mozart’s time,
“sonata” meant instrumental music with one to four parts, consisting of Sonata,
Minuet, Trio, Rondo, etc. A sonatina is a small sonata. There is also a sonata
allegro, initially developed as the first part of a sonata, symphony, concerto,
etc.; it generally contained an exposition, a development, and a
recapitulation. The sonata allegro is important historically because this basic
structure was gradually incorporated into most compositions. Curiously, no part
of this Mozart sonata (No. 16, K300) is in sonata allegro format (Hinson, P.
552). It starts with a theme and 6 variations. Variation V is Adagio and should
not be rushed. Then comes a break, which corresponds to the middle or slow
movement of a Beethoven sonata. This break takes the form of a minuet-trio, a
form of dance. The minuet originated as a French court dance with 3 beats and
was the predecessor of the waltz. The waltz format also includes mazurkas;
these originated as Polish dances, which is why Chopin composed so many
mazurkas. They differ from the (Viennese) waltzes that have the accent on the
first beat, in that their accent can be on the second or third beat. Waltzes
started independently in Germany as a slower dance with 3 strong beats; it then
evolved into the popular dances that we now refer to as “Viennese”. Trios
gradually went extinct as quartets gained popularity. Both the minuet and trio
in our sonata have the time signature ``3/4``. Thus every first beat carries
the accent; knowing that it is in a dance (waltz) format makes it easier to
play the minuet-trio correctly. The trio should have a totally different air
from the minuet (a convention in Mozart’s time); this change in air gives the
transition a refreshing feel. “Trio” generally refers to music played with 3
instruments; therefore, you will see three voices in this trio, which you can
assign to a violin, viola, and cello. Don’t forget the “Menuetto D. C.” (De
Capo, which means return to the beginning) at the end of the Trio; thus you
must play minuet-trio-minuet. The final section is the Rondo. Rondos have the
general structure ``ABACADA...``, which makes good use of a catchy melody, ``A``.

Our Rondo has the structure ``(BB’)A(CC’)A(BB’)A’-Coda``, a very symmetric
structure. The time signature is a lively cut time; can you figure out the key
of ``BB’``? The rest of this Rondo is all in ``A``, as is the formal key of this
sonata. The entire sonata is sometimes referred to as a variation on a single
theme, which is probably wrong, although the Rondo resembles Variation III, and
the Trio resembles Variation IV. It starts with the ``B`` structure, constructed
from a short unit of only 5 notes, repeated twice with a rest between them in
bars 1-3; it is repeated at double speed in bar 4; he cleverly uses the same
unit as a conjunction between these repetitions at the end of bar 3. It is
again repeated at half speed in bars 7 and 8 and the last 2 bars provide the
ending. Bar 9 is the same as bar 8 except that the last note is lowered instead
of raised; this abrupt change in the repeating pattern is an easy way to signal
an ending. The half speed units are disguised by adding two grace notes in the
beginning, so that, when the entire B is played at speed, we only hear the
melody without recognizing the individual repeat units. The efficiency of his
composing process is astounding – he repeated the same unit 7 times in 9 bars
using 3 speeds to compose one of his famous melodies. In fact, the entire
sonata consists of these repeated sections that are 8 to 10 bars long. There
are several sections that are 16 or 32 bars long, but these are multiples of
the basic 8 bar sections. More examples of this type of micro-structural
analysis are discussed in :ref:`IV.4` for Mozart and Beethoven. This type of
analysis can be helpful for memorization and mental play – after all, mental
play is how he composed them!

The technically challenging parts are 

#. the fast RH trill of bar 25, 
#. the fast RH runs from bar 36-60 - make sure you have good fingering, 
#. the fast broken RH octaves of bars 97-104 
#. the fast LH Alberti accompaniment of bars 119-125. 

Examine these elements to see which is the hardest for you, and
start by practicing that element first. The broken octave sequence of bars
97-104 is not just a series of broken octaves, but two melodies, an octave and
a half-step apart, chasing each other. Practice everything HS, without pedal,
until they are comfortable before starting HT. Parallel set exercises are the
key to developing the technique to play these elements and parallel set
exercise #1 (quad repetitions, :ref:`III.7.b`) is the most important, especially for
learning relaxation. For fast trills, go to :ref:`III.3.a`. The broken chords in the
LH (bar 28, etc., and in the Coda) should be played very fast, almost like a
single note, and match the RH notes. The HT practice should initially be
without pedal until you are comfortable HT.

How do you make music that sounds like Mozart? There is no secret -- the
instructions have been there all the time! They are the expression markings on
the music; for Mozart, each marking has a precise meaning, and if you follow
every one of them, including the time signature, etc., the music becomes an
intimate, intricate conversation. The “only” thing you need to do is to
suppress the urge to insert expressions of your own. There is no better example
of this than the last 3 chords at the end. It is so simple, that it is almost
unbelievable (a hallmark of Mozart): the first chord is a staccato and the
remaining two are legato. This simple device creates a convincing ending; play
it any other way, and the ending becomes a flop. Therefore, these last 3 chords
should not be pedaled although some scores (Schirmer) have pedal markings on
them. Better pianists tend to play the entire Rondo without pedal.

Let’s examine the first 8 bars in more detail.

**Right Hand**: The first 4 note theme (bar 1) is played legato followed by an
eighth note and exact 8th rest. The note and rest are needed for the audience
to “digest” the introduction of the unit. This construct is repeated, then the
4-note theme is repeated at double speed (2 per bar) in bar 4, and climaxes at
the ``C6`` played firmly and connecting to the two following staccato notes.
This doubling of speed is a device used by composers all the time. In bars 5-7,
the RH plays staccato, maintaining the level of excitement. The series of
falling notes in bars 8-9 brings this section to a close, like someone stepping
on the brakes of a car.

**Left Hand**: The simple LH accompaniment provides a rigid skeleton; without
it, the whole 9 bars would flop around like a wet noodle. The clever placement
of the ties (between the 1st and 2nd notes of bar 2, etc.) not only emphasizes
the cut time nature of each bar, but brings out the rhythmic idea within this
exposition; it sounds like a fox trot dance step – slow, slow, quick-quick-slow
in bars 2-5, repeated in bars 6-9. Because every note must be staccato in bars
6-8, the only way to emphasize the rhythm is to accent the first note of each
bar.

Both notes of bar 9 (both hands) are legato and slightly softer in order to
provide an ending, and both hands lift at the same instant. It is clear that we
must not only know what the markings are, but also why they are there. Of
course, there is no time to think about these complicated explanations; the
music should take care of that - the artist simply feels the effects of these
markings. The strategic placing of legato, staccato, ties, and accents is the
key to playing this piece, while accurately maintaining the rhythm. Hopefully,
you should now be able to continue the analysis for the rest of this piece and
reproduce music that is uniquely Mozart.

HT play is slightly more difficult than the previous *Moonlight* because this
piece is faster and requires higher accuracy. Perhaps the most difficult part
is the coordination of the trill in the RH with the LH in bar 25. Don’t try to
learn this by slowing it down. Simply make sure that the HS work is completely
done using bars 25 and 26 as a single practice segment, then combine the 2
hands at speed. Always try to combine things HT at speed (or close to it)
first, and use slower speeds only as a last resort because if you succeed, you
will save lots of time and avoid forming bad habits. Advanced pianists almost
never have to combine hands by slowing down.

After you are comfortable HT without the pedal, add the pedal. In the section
starting at bar 27, the combination of broken LH chords, RH octaves, and pedal
creates a sense of grandeur that is representative of how Mozart could create
grandeur from relatively simple constructs. Hold the last note of this section
a little longer than required by the rhythm (tenuto, bar 35), especially after
the repetition, before launching into the next section. As stated earlier,
Mozart wrote no pedal markings; therefore, after practicing HT without pedal,
add pedal only where you think it will elevate the music. Especially with
difficult material such as Rachmaninoff’s, less pedal is looked upon by the
pianist community as indicating superior technique.

Chopin's Fantaisie-Impromptu, Op. 66, Fast Play Degradation (FPD)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This example was selected because:

  #. Everyone likes this composition
  #. Without good learning methods it can seem impossible to learn 
  #. The exhilaration of suddenly being able to play it is unmatched 
  #. The challenges of the piece are ideal for illustration purposes
  #. This is the kind of piece that you will be working on all your life in 
     order to do "incredible things" with it, so you might as well start now! 

Most students who have difficulty do so because they can't get started and the
initial hurdle produces a mental block that makes them doubt their ability to
play this piece. There is no better demonstration of the efficacy of the
methods of this book than demonstrating how to learn this composition. However,
because this piece is reasonably difficult, you should read :ref:`III` before
learning it.

You will need about 2 yrs of piano lessons before you can start learning this
piece. For easier pieces, try the above *Moonlight* and *Rondo*, or section
:ref:`III.6.l`, Bach's *Inventions*. Make sure you figure out the key before you start.

.. hint:: 
   After the ``G#`` “announcement”, it starts with ``C#`` in bar 3 and the
   composition ends with ``C#``, and the Largo starts with ``Db`` 
   (same note as ``C#``!); but is each in a major or minor key? 

The large number of sharps and flats, as in this composition, often worries
beginners; however, the black keys are easier to play than the white keys once
you know the flat finger positions (see :ref:`III.4.b`) and the Thumb Over method (see
:ref:`III.5`). Chopin may have chosen these “far out” keys for this reason, because
the scale does not matter in the Equal Temperament that he probably used (see
:ref:`CH2.2.c`).

We start by reviewing the preliminary work with HS practice and mental play.
Therefore you should practice HT with the objective of attaining very accurate
synchronization of the two hands. Although the last page might be most
difficult, we will break the rule about starting at the end and start at the
beginning because this piece is difficult to start correctly but, once started,
it takes care of itself. You need a strong, confident beginning. So we will
start with the first two pages, up to the slow cantabile part. The LH stretch
and continuous workout makes endurance (i.e., relaxation) a major issue. Those
without sufficient experience and especially those with smaller hands, may need
to work on the LH for weeks before it becomes satisfactory. Fortunately, the LH
is not that fast, so speed is not a limiting factor and most students should be
able to play the LH faster HS than final speed in less than two weeks,
completely relaxed, without fatigue.

For bar 5 where the RH first comes in, the suggested LH fingering is
``532124542123``. You might start by practicing bar 5, LH, by cycling it
continually until you can play it well. You should stretch the palm, not the
fingers, which can lead to stress and injury. See section :ref:`III.7.e` for palm
stretching exercises.

Practice without the pedal. Practice in small segments. Suggested segments are:
bars 1-4, 5-6, 1st half of 7, 2nd half of 7, 8, 10 (skip 9 which is the same as
5), 11, 12, 13-14, 15- 16, 19-20, 21-22, 30-32, 33-34, then 2 chords in 35. If
you cannot reach the 2nd chord, play it as a very fast ascending broken chord,
with emphasis on the top note. After each segment is memorized and
satisfactory, connect them in pairs. Then play the whole LH from memory by
starting from the beginning and adding segments. Bring it up to final speed and
check your mental play.

When you can play this entire section (LH only) twice in succession, relaxed,
without feeling tired, you have the necessary endurance. At this point, it is a
lot of fun to go much faster than final speed. In preparation for HT work, get
up to about 1.5 times final speed. Raise the wrist slightly when playing the
pinky and lower it as you approach the thumb. By raising the wrist, you will
find that you can put more power into the pinky, and by lowering the wrist you
avoid missing the thumb note. In Chopin's music, the pinky and thumb (but
especially the pinky) notes are most important, so practice playing these two
fingers with authority. The Cartwheel Method, explained in :ref:`III.5`, may
be useful here.

When you are satisfied with it, insert the pedal; basically, the pedal should
be cut with every chord change which generally occurs either once every bar or
twice every bar. The pedal is a rapid up and down ("cutting the sound") motion
at the first beat, but you can lift the pedal earlier for special effects. For
the wide LH stretch in the second half of bar 14 (starting with ``E2``), the
fingering is ``532124`` if you can reach it comfortably. If not, use ``521214``.

At the same time, you should have been practicing the RH, switching hands as
soon as the working hand feels slightly tired. The routines are almost
identical to those for the LH, including practicing without the pedal. Start by
splitting bar 5 into two halves and learn each half separately up to speed, and
then join them. For the rising arpeggio in bar 7, use the thumb over method
because it is too fast to be played thumb under. The fingering should be such
that both hands tend to play the pinky or thumb at the same time; this makes it
easier to play HT. This is why it is not a good idea to fool around with the
fingerings of the LH -- use the fingerings as marked on the score.

Now practice HT. You can start with either the first or second half of bar 5
where the RH comes in for the first time. The second half is probably easier
because of the smaller stretch of the LH and there is no timing problem with
the missing first note in the RH (for the first half), so let's start with the
second half. The easiest way to learn the 3,4 timing is to do it at speed from
the beginning. Don't try to slow down and figure out where each note should go,
because too much of that will introduce an unevenness in your playing that may
become impossible to correct later on. Here we use the "cycling" method -- see
"Cycling" in section :ref:`III.2`. First, cycle the six notes of the LH continually,
without stopping. Then switch hands and do the same for the eight notes of the
RH, at the same (final) tempo as you did for the LH. Next cycle only the LH
several times, and then let the RH join in. Initially, you only need to match
the first notes accurately; don't worry if the others aren't quite right. In a
few tries, you should be able to play HT fairly well. If not, stop and start
all over again, cycling HS. Since almost the whole composition is made up of
things like the segment you just practiced, it pays to practice this well,
until you are very comfortable. To accomplish this, change the speed. Go very
fast, then very slowly. As you slow down, you will be able to take notice of
where all the notes fit with respect to each other. You will find that fast is
not necessarily difficult, and slower is not always easier. The 3,4 timing is a
mathematical device Chopin used to produce the illusion of hyper-speed in this
piece. The mathematical explanations and additional salient points of this
composition are further discussed under "Cycling" in :ref:`III.2`. You will
probably practice this composition HS for years after you initially complete
the piece because it is so much fun to experiment with this fascinating
composition. Now add the pedal. This is when you should develop the habit of
accurately pumping the pedal.

If you are satisfied with the second half of bar 5, repeat the same procedure
for the first half. Then assemble the two halves together. One disadvantage of
the HS-HT approach is that practically all technique acquisition is
accomplished HS, possibly resulting in poorly synchronized HT play. You now
have most the tools to learn the rest of this composition by yourself!

The cantabile section is the same thing repeated four times with increasing
complexity. Therefore, learn (and memorize) the first repetition first because
it is the easiest, then learn the 4th repetition because it is the most
difficult. Normally, we should learn the most difficult part first but, in this
case, starting with the 4th repetition may take too long for some students, and
learning the easiest repetition first can make it much easier to learn the 4th
repetition because they are similar. As with many Chopin pieces, memorizing the
LH well is the quickest way to build a firm foundation for memorizing because
the LH usually has a simpler structure that is easier to analyze, memorize and
play. Moreover, Chopin often created different versions of the RH for each
repetition while using essentially the same notes in the LH as he did in this
case (same chord progressions); therefore, after you learn the first
repetition, you already know most of the LH part of the 4th repetition,
enabling you to learn this last repetition quickly.

The trill in the 1st bar of the 4th repetition, combined with the 2,3 timing,
makes the 2nd half of this bar difficult. Since there are 4 repetitions, you
might play it without the trill in the first repetition, then an inverted
mordent the 2nd, a short trill the 3rd, and a longer trill the last time
around.

The third section (Presto!) is similar to the first section, so if you managed
to learn the first section, you are almost home free. However, this time, it is
faster than the first time (Allegro) – Chopin apparently wants you to play this
at two different speeds, possibly because he saw that they can sound quite
different when you change the speed; why should it sound different, and in what
way? -- the physics and psychology of this speed change is discussed in :ref:`III.2`.
Note that in the final 20 bars or so, the RH pinky and thumb carry notes of
major thematic value, all the way to the end. This section may require a lot of
HS practice with the RH.

If you play any composition at full speed (or faster) too often, you may suffer
what I call "fast play degradation" (FPD). The following day, you might find
that you can't play it as well any more, or during practice, you can't make any
progress. This happens mostly with HT play. HS play is more immune to FPD and
can in fact be used to correct it. FPD occurs probably because the human
playing mechanism (hands, brain, etc) gets confused at such speeds, and
therefore occurs only for complex procedures such as HT play of conceptually or
technically difficult pieces. Easy pieces do not suffer FPD. FPD can create
enormous problems with complex music like Bach's or Mozart's compositions.
Students who try to speed them up HT can run into all sorts of problems and the
standard solution had been to simply keep practicing slowly. However, there is
a neat solution to this problem -- use HS practice! And remember that whenever
you play fast, you will generally suffer FPD if you do not play slowly at least
once before quitting. Also, FPD can be an indication that your mental play may
not be solid or up to speed.
