.. _II.7:

7. Hands Separate Practice: Acquiring Technique
-----------------------------------------------

Essentially 100% of technique development is accomplished by practicing hands
separately (HS). Do not try to develop finger/hand technique hands together
(HT) as that is much more difficult, time consuming, and dangerous, as
explained in detail later.

Choose two short passages, one each for the right hand (RH) and the left hand
(LH). Practice the RH until it begins to tire, then switch to the LH. Switch
every 5 to 15 seconds, before either the resting hand cools and becomes
sluggish, or the working hand becomes tired. If you choose the rest interval
wisely, you will find that the rested hand is eager to perform. Don't practice
when the hand is tired, because that will lead to stress (unnecessary muscle
contraction) and bad habits. Those unfamiliar with HS practice will generally
have a weaker LH. In that case, give the LH more work. In this scheme, you can
practice hard 100% of the time, but you never practice with fatigued hands!

For the two difficult sections of *FÃ¼r Elise*, practice them HS until each hand
becomes comfortable, up to speeds faster than final speed, before putting the
hands together. This may take from a few days to several weeks depending on
your level of play. As soon as you can play HS reasonably well, try HT to check
that the fingering works.

It should be emphasized that HS practice is only for difficult passages that
you cannot play. If you can play the passage adequately HT, by all means, skip
the HS part! The ultimate objective of this book is for you to be able to
quickly play HT with practically no HS practice after you become proficient.
The objective is not to cultivate a dependence on HS practice. Use HS only when
necessary and try to reduce its use gradually as your technique advances.
However, you will be able to play HT with little HS practice only after you
have become pretty advanced -- most students will be dependent on HS practice
for 5 to 10 years, and will never completely abandon its use. The reason for
this is that all technique is most quickly acquired HS. There is one exception
to this option of skipping HS practice. That is memorizing; you should memorize
everything HS for several important reasons (see :ref:`III.6`). Therefore,
although you may not need to practice HS, you may need to memorize HS unless
you are an advanced pianist with good mental play. Such advanced topics will be
discussed later on.

Beginning students should practice HS with everything they learn so as to
master this critically important method as quickly as possible. With HS
practice, you acquire finger/hand technique; then with HT practice you only
need to learn how to coordinate the two hands. By separating these tasks, you
learn them better and faster. Once the HS method is mastered, the student
should start to experiment with playing HT without using HS. Most students
should be able to master the HS methods in two to three years. The HS method is
not just separating the hands. What we will learn below are the myriad of
learning tricks you can use once the hands are separated.

HS practice is valuable long after you have learned a piece. You can push your
technique much further HS than HT. And it is a lot of fun! You can really
exercise the fingers/hands/arms. It is superior to anything Hanon or other
exercises can provide. This is when you can figure out "incredible ways" to
play that piece. This is when you can really improve your technique. The
initial learning of the composition only serves to familiarize your fingers
with the music. The amount of time spent playing pieces you have completely
mastered is what separates the accomplished pianist from the amateur. This is
why accomplished pianists can perform but most amateurs can only play for
themselves.
