.. _I.2:

2. What is Piano Technique?
---------------------------

We must understand what technique is because not understanding technique leads
to incorrect practice methods. More importantly, a proper understanding can help
us to develop correct practice methods. The most common misunderstanding is that
technique is some inherited finger dexterity. It is not. The innate dexterity of
accomplished pianists and ordinary folk are not that different. This means that
practically anyone can learn to play the piano well. There are numerous examples
of mentally handicapped people with limited coordination that exhibit incredible
musical talent (savants). Unfortunately, many of us are much more dexterous but
can't manage the musical passages because of a lack of some simple but critical
information. Acquiring technique is mostly a process of brain/nerve development,
not development of finger strength.

Technique is the ability to execute a zillion different piano passages;
therefore it is not dexterity, but an aggregate of many skills. The wondrous
thing about piano technique, and the most important message of this book, is
that piano skills can be learned in a short time, if the correct learning
procedures are applied. These skills are acquired in two stages: 

  #. Discovering how the fingers, hands, arms, etc., are to be moved 
  #. Conditioning the brain, nerves, and muscles to execute these with ease and control

Many students think of piano practice as hours of finger calisthenics because
they were never taught the proper definition of technique. The reality is that
you are improving your brain when learning piano! You are actually making
yourself smarter and improving your memory; this is why learning piano correctly
has so many benefits, such as success in school, the ability to better cope with
everyday problems, and the ability to retain memory longer as you age. This is
why memorizing is an inseparable part of technique acquisition.

We must understand our own anatomy and learn how to discover and acquire the
correct technique. This turns out to be an nearly impossible task for the
average human brain unless you dedicate your entire life to it from childhood.
Even then, most will not succeed. The reason is that, without proper
instruction, the pianist must discover the correct motions, etc., by trial and
error. You must depend on the small probability that, as you try to play that
difficult passage faster, your hand accidentally stumbles onto a motion that
works. If you are unlucky, your hand never discovers the motion and you are
stuck forever, a phenomenon called "speed wall". Most beginning piano students
haven't the foggiest idea about the complex motions that the fingers, hands, and
arms can perform. Fortunately, the many geniuses who came before us have made
most of the useful discoveries (otherwise, they wouldn't have been such great
performers) leading to efficient practice methods.

Another misconception about technique is that once the fingers become
sufficiently skillful, you can play anything. Almost every different passage is
a new adventure; it must be learned anew. Experienced pianists seem to be able
to play just about anything because:

  #. They have practiced all the things that you encounter frequently
  #. They know how to learn new things very quickly

There are large classes of passages, such as scales, that appear frequently;
knowledge of how to play these will cover significant portions of most
compositions. But more importantly, there are general solutions for large
classes of problems and specific solutions for specific problems.
