.. _IV.2:

2. Scientific Approach to Piano Practice
----------------------------------------

.. _IV.2.a:

a. The Scientific Method.
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This book was written using the scientific skills learned during my 9-year
undergraduate-graduate education and 31-year career as a scientist. I worked in
fundamental research (I have been granted six patents), materials science
(mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, mechanical engineering, electronics,
optics, acoustics, metals, semiconductors, insulators), industrial problem
solving (failure mechanisms, reliability, manufacturing), and scientific
reporting (published over 100 peer-reviewed articles in most of the major
scientific journals). Even after obtaining my Doctorate in Physics from Cornell
University, my employers spent over a million dollars to further my education
during my employment. This scientific training was indispensable for writing
this book, and most pianists would not be able to duplicate my efforts. I
explain below why the results of scientific efforts are useful to everybody,
not only scientists.

A common misunderstanding is that science is too difficult for artists. This
really boggles the mind. The mental processes that artists go through in
producing the highest levels of music or other arts are at least as complex as
those of scientists contemplating the origin of the universe. There may be some
validity to the argument that people are born with different interests in art
or science; however, I do not subscribe even to that view. The vast majority of
people can be artists or scientists depending on their exposure to each field,
especially in early childhood.

Science is a field that specializes in advancing and using knowledge; but this
formal definition does not help non-scientists in their daily decisions on how
to deal with science. I have had endless discussions with scientists and
non-scientists about how to define science and have concluded that the formal
definition is too easily misinterpreted. The most useful definition of the
scientific method is that it is any method that works. Science is empowerment.
Although smart scientists are needed to advance science, anyone can benefit
from science. Thus another way of defining science is that it makes previously
impossible tasks possible and simplifies difficult tasks. Example: if an
illiterate person were asked to add two 6-digit numbers, he would have no way
of doing it by himself. However, nowadays, any 3rd grader who has learned
arithmetic can perform that task, given a pen and paper. Today, you can teach
that illiterate person to add those numbers on a calculator in minutes.
Demonstrably, science has made a previously impossible task easy for everyone.

Experience has shown that the scientific method works best if certain
guidelines are followed. The first is the use of...

**Definitions**: Without the precise definitions presented throughout this
book, most of the discussions in this book would become cumbersome or
ambiguous. 

**Research**: In scientific research, you perform experiments, get the data,
and document the results in such a way that others can understand what you did
and can reproduce the results. Unfortunately, that is not what has been
happening in piano teaching. Liszt never wrote down his practice methods.
Nonetheless, a tremendous amount of research has been conducted by all the
great pianists. Very little of that had been documented, until I wrote this
book.

**Documentation and Communication**: It is an incalculable loss that Bach,
Chopin, Liszt, etc., did not write down their practice methods. They probably
did not have sufficient resources or training to undertake such a task. An
important function of documentation is the elimination of errors. Once an idea
is written down, we can check for its accuracy and remove any errors and add
new findings. Documentation is used to create a one-way street in which the
material can only improve with time. One finding that surprised even scientists
is that about half of all new discoveries are made, not when performing the
experiments, but when the results were being written up. It was during the
writing of this book, that I discovered the explanation for speed walls. I was
faced with writing something about speed walls and naturally started asking
what they are, how many there are, and what creates them. It is important to
communicate with all other specialists doing similar work and to openly discuss
any new research results. In this respect, the piano world has been woefully
inadequate. Most books on piano playing don't even have references and they
rarely build upon previous works of others. In writing my first edition book, I
learned the importance of properly documenting and organizing the ideas from
the fact that, although I knew most of the ideas in my book for about 10 years,
I did not fully benefit from them until I finished that book. I then re-read it
and tried it out systematically. That's when I discovered how effective the
method was! Apparently, although I knew most of the ingredients of the method,
there were some gaps that weren't filled until I was faced with putting all the
ideas in some useful, organized structure. It is as if I had all the components
of a car, but they were useless for transportation until a mechanic assembled
them and tuned up the car.

**Basic theory**: Scientific results must always be based on some theory or
principle that can be verified by others. Very few concepts stand alone,
independently of anything else. Explanations like "it worked for me," or "I've
taught this for 30 years" or even "this is how Liszt did it" aren't good
enough. If a teacher had been teaching the procedure for 30 years, s/he should
have had plenty of time to figure out why it works. The explanations are often
more important than the procedures they explain. For example HS practice works
because it simplifies a difficult task. Once this principle of simplification
is established, you can start looking for more things like that, such as
shortening difficult passages or outlining. The nicest property of basic theory
is that we don't need to be told every detail about how to execute the
procedure -- we can often fill in the details ourselves from our understanding
of the method.

.. _IV.2.b:

b. Principles of Learning
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Isn’t it strange that although elementary schools, colleges, and universities
are centers of learning, none of them teach you how to learn? Our discovery in
this book that piano teaching has historically not taught practice methods is
duplicated in learning centers where learning has not been formally taught. In
the course of writing this book, it became clear that the basic principles for
learning piano have universal applicability to any learning and project
execution, such as sports, warfare, or weeding your yard. So let’s examine
these principles.

Learning versus Age. We now recognize the importance of the learning processes
that occur between the ages of 0 and 8. Because the brain is developing at this
stage, it has an almost limitless ability to learn, when nurtured properly.
Conversely, there are examples of below average intelligence resulting from
childhood neglect. Initial brain development is influenced by sensory inputs.
The main human senses are touch, temperature, hearing, sight, taste, and smell.
A newborn first uses the sense of touch: the baby’s cheeks are sensitive to the
touch of the mother’s breast and rubbing the cheek elicits the reaction to
search for the mother’s breast and to curl the tongue around the nipple to
suckle. This ability to curl the tongue is interesting because many adults are
unable to curl their tongues although they were obviously able to do it as a
baby. This situation is similar to the case of youngsters acquiring absolute
pitch effortlessly, but then losing it after their teen years.

The next sense to develop is hearing. Babies can hear at birth and are now
routinely tested immediately after birth in order to detect hearing defects as
early as possible. Early detection can prevent mental and developmental
retardation caused by lack of hearing input because there are methods of
replacing hearing by other inputs to stimulate the brain. Hearing at birth is
important for recognizing the mother’s voice; in animals, this is a critical
survival tool for finding their mothers in large colonies. This is why babies
can learn absolute pitch and any other properties of sound instantly with great
accuracy. As the baby grows, the hearing related developments change from
memory to logic in order to facilitate language learning. In both the memory
and logic stages, music plays an important role in brain and emotional
development. Thus music precedes language – unlike language, music is a natural
built-in brain function that does not need to be taught. Music can create
emotions and utilize logic that cannot be expressed in any language; therefore
babies can benefit from musical inputs long before they can say “mama” or
“dada”.

Babies apparently have more brain cells than adults although the brain mass is
much smaller. Brain growth occurs by growth of stimulated cells and elimination
of unstimulated ones. Greater stimulation causes more cells to be retained,
thus increasing memory and intelligence. Although children between the ages of
2 to 8 can learn many things quickly, they can forget them just as quickly
because the brain is changing rapidly. In an adult, the brain is much less
adaptable because its wiring system has been finalized. Thus any baby can learn
to speak any language well, but adults learning a new language often never
learn to pronounce words correctly. Language, musical and athletic developments
follow similar paths, indicating that the brain plays the major role. It is now
generally accepted that geniuses are not born but made – that Mozart was a
genius because he was a musician from early childhood. The implications of this
conclusion are enormous, because it applies to any of us. Clearly, brain
research is going to be one of the greatest revolutions yet to come.

**Learning Physical skills**: Learning physical skills, such as playing the
piano, is a type of project management. Project management consists of:
defining the objective of the project, estimating how much time and effort will
be required, determining whether such resources are available, knowing exactly
how the project will end, and then creating a plan of action.

Estimating the time it takes to finish the project is often the most difficult
part. It is useful to classify projects as short term or long term: skills that
can be learned in a few days, or those that require a good fraction of a
lifetime to learn. By knowing that a certain project can be finished in couple
days, you know that something is wrong if it takes longer – this can prevent
you from wasting time because you must immediately look for a better way.
Likewise, knowing that a project is going to take a good fraction of a lifetime
can ease the frustration if you work hard for a long time and still can not
finish it. All successful projects are knowledge based; theory is not enough.
There is one class of skills that is especially easy to learn; these are skills
that have “learning tricks”. In piano practice we saw that HS and parallel set
methods are powerful learning tricks. The plan of action involves simplifying
difficult tasks into sub-tasks and executing each sub-task separately. The
basic principles are not enough by themselves because project management is
knowledge based. For learning piano, the basic principles will teach you HS and
segmental practice, but they will not provide the continuity rule, parallel
sets, or TO. Clearly, these general principles of project management have
universal applicability, but the success of the project still depends on
knowledge.

**Other Principles**: don’t start new sections until the previous is completed,
know the maintenance procedures for finished sections, and have a clear
definition of project completion.
