.. Fundamentals of Piano Practice - Chapter 1 Section V Index 

.. _V.:

======================================
V. Jazz, Fake Books, and Improvisation
======================================

It is important to learn contemporary music because it is educational (music
theory, freer expression of music, compositional skills), transforms you into a
better performer, widens your audience, creates many performance and income
opportunities, makes you a more complete musician, gives you a greater sense of
empowerment, and is a lot of fun because, compared to classical music, you get
quicker rewards for a given investment of time.

Although there is a general feeling that this genre is easier than classical,
it still takes considerable work to master. What is the most important skill
you need to learn? CHORDS! Basic chords (3-note), inversions, major/minor,
dominant 7th, diminished, augmented, larger chords, and how to use them –
combining hands, arpeggios, fast broken chords, rhythmic jumps, etc., and there
is a different set for every note (tonic) on the piano! This is a huge number
of chords; fortunately, you can start by learning just a few of them. You also
need to learn all the scales, their proper fingering, and to coordinate the RH
melody with the LH accompaniment (these are the reasons why learning classical
gives you a big edge). You will also have to know all about the circle of
fifths and chord progressions. Therefore, you may be playing the simplest
things in a matter of weeks; but it will take a year for most students to feel
comfortable with this genre. For example, there is no such thing as true
improvisation for at least a few years because true improvisation is as
difficult in this genre as composing is, in classical. What is generally
referred to as improvisation is “practiced improvisation” in which you have
practiced a set of optional changes to pick from, and these changes usually
follow a set of rules.

I review some literature in the “Jazz, Fake Books, and Improvisation” book
review section of the Reference section; these will give you a good idea of how
to get started. You might begin with Blake’s “How to Play from a Fake Book”.
Fake books are simplified sheet music in which only the RH melody and the
associated chords are indicated. It is up to you to decide how to play these
chords – this is why you need to learn all about chords; not only are there so
many of them, but each can be played in many different ways. Therefore,
learning all about chords is where you will initially spend most of your time.
Fake books are the easiest to start with because you don’t have to know chord
progressions – they are given to you on the sheet music. See the book review in
the Reference for more information on Blake’s book.

The next reviewed book to use is *How To Play The Piano Despite Years Of
Lessons* by Cannel and Marx, which is not a book about technique; instead, it
teaches how to play jazz, popular songs, or from fake books. Again, we learn
all about chords but, in addition, we learn about the circle of fifths and
chord progressions, so that you can “play by ear” – remembering a melody, you
should be able to figure out the melody with your RH and add your own LH
without a fake book. Gets you started immediately by playing simple stuff –
read the review for more details. This is the only book of the 3 discussed here
that treats rhythm, which is very important in jazz.

A third book you may want to read is Sabatella’s *A Whole Approach to Jazz
Improvisation* which is basically a detailed definition of all the chords and
scales, as well as discussions of jazz history and what music you should listen
to, as examples of how they are played. This book can be browsed free (see
review), but there are no songs or music to play – just theory and discussions.

Perhaps the happiest finding in all this is how restrictive the chord
progressions are, in terms of the circle of fifths (see Cannel & Marx,
Sabatella). This makes it easy to get started, and to advance progressively
into more complex music. We must all learn the circle of fifths because it is
needed for tuning the violin, learning how to tune the piano in the
temperaments, understanding those temperaments, figuring out all the scales,
their chords, and the key signatures, as well as understanding music theory.
But why does the human brain respond in this way to the circle of fifths? Is it
because we have become accustomed to the chromatic scale which is a direct
byproduct of the circle of fifths, or is there an underlying biological origin?
As alluded to by Mathieu, there is an instinctive mental affinity to the small
primes (1, 2, 3, 5, 7, etc.) in terms of harmony; the prime 1 is the unison
which is one note and does not produce much music, although Phillip Glass uses
it a lot (repetitions) in his compositions. 2 is the octave and is used only as
small parts in larger compositions (*Für Elise*). 3 is the circle of fifths and
gives birth to the chromatic scale, all the music we play, and the chord
progressions. There is nothing “natural” about the chromatic scale. It does not
exist in nature and is a purely human construct that is useful because the
notes are sufficiently closely spaced, and span a sufficiently wide frequency
range, so that we can represent practically any music with it; it also
approximates the principal intervals (which exist in nature) that the brain
recognizes. In the absence of research results, my personal opinion is that
chords and chord progressions are recognized by the brain because of the
logarithmic response of the ear to frequencies. The reason for the logarithmic
response is that it covers a wide range of frequencies. This response makes
frequency ratios particularly easy to track in the brain because all
frequencies of a ratio are equidistant from each other in logarithmic space
(possibly, right in the cochlea). Chord progressions are not only ratios but
any single change along the circle of fifths leaves at least one note common to
both chords, making it especially easy for the brain to calculate the
frequencies of the new chord. Therefore, chords and chord progressions along
the circle of fifths represent the simplest sets of frequencies for the brain
to process. Introduction of any other frequency will create horrendous problems
for the brain in terms of memory and processing. Thus harmony and chord
progressions have some biological basis in addition to our tendency to become
“addicted” to any music scale that we hear frequently. This addiction may be
related to a biological need to recognize each other; for example, how does a
mother penguin recognize her chick just from its chirp among thousands of other
chicks, after returning from a long feeding trip? It is a built-in biological
addiction to a familiar sound. However, this biological explanation still
leaves open the question of why almost every music ever composed has a tonal
key, and why the music must return to this tonal key in order for it to be
resolved (end satisfactorily). The brain somehow recognizes a certain key as
“home” and must return to it.

In summary, the process of learning this genre consists of practicing the
chords and scales sufficiently so that, given a melody, you can “feel” the
right and wrong chords that go along with it. This takes a lot of playing and
experimentation. Alternatively, you can learn to recognize the chord
progressions, which is not easy either, and develop a sounder approach using
theory. Therefore, if you take a long term approach, and start with a few
simple pieces and gradually add more complexity, you should be quite
successful. It is important that you perform these pieces as soon as possible,
and to critically assess your strong/weak points and work to improve your
performances. Because this genre is still young, the instruction books are not
all consistent; for example, the circle of fifths in Sabatella goes clockwise
with respect to the sharps, but goes counter clockwise in Cannel and Marx, and
exactly how you should use the 7th chords depends on which book you read. It is
clear that this genre is here to stay, has great educational and practical
value, is relatively easy to learn, and can be a lot of fun.
