.. Fundamentals of Piano Practice documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Thu Jul 24 09:52:12 2014.

.. _index:

Fundamentals of Piano Practice
==============================

This is the best book ever written on how to practice at the piano! Most books
list what skills are needed (scales, arpeggios, trills, etc.), but not how to
acquire them. This book teaches how to solve technical problems, step by step.
Learn practice methods, how to acquire technique and memorize hours of
repertoire, sight reading, musical playing, relaxation, etc., and, most
importantly, Mental Play in which you learn to play the piano in your mind.
Mental play touches every aspect of piano playing, from memorizing, controlling
nervousness, developing performance skills, playing musically, etc., to
acquiring absolute pitch, composing and improvisation. It is almost
unbelievable that such an essential skill has been mostly neglected by piano
teachers. All great musicians used it, yet even they often failed to teach it.
We learn why the traditional methods of teaching piano widely used today are
the reasons why students give up piano.

Genius is more created than born; this is illustrated by analyzing how the
greatest pianists learned and composed. Most (perhaps all?) of what were
previously attributed to talent are shown to be simple knowledge-based
solutions (to difficult problems) that we can all learn. Improved memory can
raise the effective IQ; memory is an associative process based on algorithms --
music is just such an algorithm and that is why we can easily memorize an
entire Beethoven sonata. Learning piano makes you smarter and helps you succeed
because it teaches project management.

This book has a chapter explaining the chromatic scale and temperaments, with
detailed instructions on how to tune your own piano. The Equal Temperament, so
universally used today, muddies the music and dulls our sensitivities; we
should return to the more musical Well temperaments that the greatest musicians
of all time researched so meticulously.

.. warning::
   This is a work in progress, some sections have not been copied over, there
   are probably a few formatting errors/inconsistencies, and generally nuttiness.
   Please ignore or contribute patches on GitHub.


Table of Contents
-----------------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   about
   preface
   chapter1/index
   chapter2/index
   terms
   references


Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`
